

1    title:  gender and the treatment of immune-mediated chronic inflammatoryautoinflammatory  diseases:  rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease and psoriasis – an observational study.    nienke lesuis1*, ragnar befrits2, filippa nyberg3, ronald f van vollenhoven4    study design:  historical cohort study    authors  1work address: medical faculty, radboud university, geert grooteplein 21, 6500 hb, nijmegen, the  netherlands. medical student at radboud university the time the study was done, now graduated  and working at the rheumatology department, sint maartenskliniek, nijmegen, the netherlands.  contact address: rembrandtstraat 44b, 6521 me, nijmegen, the netherlands.   email: n.lesuis@maartenskliniek.nl    2work address: gastrocentrum medicin, karolinska university hospital, 17176 stockholm, sweden  email: ragnar.befrits@karolinska.se    3work address: uppsala university hospital, uppsala, and unit for dermatology, institution for clinical  sciences, karolinska institutet, danderyd hospital, se-182 88 stockholm,  sweden  email: filippa.nyberg@akademiska.se    4professor and chief, unit for clinical therapy research inflammatory diseases (clintrid), the  karolinska institute.   chief, clinical trials unit, department of rheumatology.  work address: clintrid, the karolinska university hospital, d10:0, 17176 stockholm, sweden.  formatted: dutch (netherlands) formatted: dutch (netherlands)


2    *corresponding author  email-adresses:  nl: n.lesuis@maartenskliniek.nl  rb: ragnar.befrits@karolinska.se  fn: filippa.nyberg@akademiska.se  rfvv: ronald.van.vollenhoven@ki.se  word count  abstract: 279349 words  total manuscript: 37833569 words           


3    gender and the treatment of autoinflammatory  immune-mediated chronic inflammatory diseases:   rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease and psoriasis – an observational study.    abstract  background   rheumatoid arthritis (ra), inflammatory bowel disease (ibd) and psoriasis are auto- inflammatoryimmune-mediated inflammatory diseases with similarities in pathophysiology and that  all can be treated with similar biological agents. previous studies have shown gender differences with  regard to disease characteristics in ra and ibd, with women generally having worse scores on pain  and quality of life measurements; for psoriasis less is known on this subject. because treatment  differences between the sexes could explain the observed dissimilarities we investigated gender  differences in biological treatment and disease characteristics prior to treatment initiation.  methods   data on ra and ibd patients were collected from two registries in which patients are  enrolled who are treated with biologic medication. basic demographic data and disease activity  parameters were collected from a time point just prior to the initiation of the biological treatment.  for psoriasis data came from the annual report 2010 of the swedish psoriasis register for systemic  treatment; this included also non-biologic treatment. for all three diseases the prescribed treatment  and disease characteristics were compared between men and women.   results   in total 4493 adult patients were included in the study (ra: 1912, ibd: 131, psoriasis: 2450).  in ra, the majority of the treated patients were women and in ibd and psoriasis the majority were  men. no significant differences in the choice of biologicals for men and for women were observed. at  treatment start, significant gender differences were seen in the subjective disease measurements for  both ra and psoriasis, women scoring higher (ie, worse) than men. no differences in objective  measurements were found in ra, but in psoriasis men scored higher (ie, worse) on objective disease  activity measures. a trend similar to ra was observed in ibd.  


4    conclusions   women with ra and psoriasis scored significantly higher on subjective, but not on  objective, disease activity measures than men and the same trend was seen in ibd. this indicates a  greater burden impact of disease in women at the same level of treatment. these findings might  suggest that in all three inflammatory diseases subjective measures are somewhat discounted in the  therapeutic decision making process, which could indicate an systematic undertreatment in females.     keywords  rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, psoriasis, gender, biological treatment    background  rheumatoid arthritis (ra) is a chronic systemic disease in which the synovial joints are  affected; joint inflammation may lead to progressive bone and cartilage destruction which eventually  causes loss of function and disability [1]. in order to control symptoms and prevent joint damage,   treatment with disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (dmards, such as methotrexate,  sulfasalazine and others) is the cornerstone of ra management; followed by the use of biological  medications of which anti-tnf agents are being used most often [1,2]. the expression and clinical  course of ra are influenced by gender in several ways. in developed countries the prevalence of ra is  0.5-1.0% with a male:female ratio of 1:3; the reason for this imbalance is not clear but both genetic  and hormonal factors are likely to be involved. in most studies that focused on gender in ra, women  had higher disease activity scores, more pain and more loss of function, both in early and established  disease [3-6]. other  studies demonstrated faster progression of disability in women as measured by  health assessment questionnaire (haq) and a lower remission rate in women with early ra [3,7].  although these studies suggest a less favorable course in women, there is also evidence to the  contrary. one study found that erosive disease (ie, severe joint destruction) was more frequent in 


5    men and also occurred earlier in the disease.  in contrast, women underwent more surgeries to  correct the consequences of joint destruction [8].  crohn’s disease (cd) and ulcerative colitis (uc) are the two most common forms of  inflammatory bowel disease (ibd): chronic systemic diseases with inflammation of the  gastrointestinal tract. uc only affects the large bowel whereas cd can involve the whole  gastrointestinal tract. in the treatment of ibd corticosteroids, aminosalicylates and  immunosuppressive agents are used to induce and remain long-term remission. when those fail to  achieve sufficient disease control biological agents can be used, infliximab being the most widely  used biologic in ibd treatment [9]. the literature concerning gender and ibd is relatively limited and  to some extent contradictory. the male:female incidence ratio is estimated to be around 1:1.5 [10].  female gender was a risk factor for earlier recurrence of cd after surgery in two studies [10,11], but  male gender had a greater risk in another study [12]. gender was not a prognostic factor for disease  course [13]. ibd is associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer, but this risk seems to be  lower in females [14].  psoriasis encompasses a group of chronic, immune-mediated inflammatory skin and  joint diseases of which chronic plaque psoriasis is the most common form. in the treatment of  psoriasis topical agents are used first, followed by or in combination with phototherapy and and/or  finally systemic therapy [15]. both non-biological (methotrexate, acitretin, cyclosporine and uv- therapy) and biological agents (etanercept, adalimumab, infliximab and ustekinumab) can be used as  systemic therapy [16]. there is no difference in the male:female ratio with an estimated prevalence  of 2% for both sexes [17]. a few studies on health related quality of life (hrqol) have suggested that  with the same degree of skin disease women experience more stigmatization and worse hrqol  [18,19]; in contrast, a systemic review did not find a relation between gender and quality of life [20].  thus, some gender differences are observed in all three of these autoimmune  immune-mediated inflammatory diseases. in previous studies many explanations have been given for 


6    the observed gender differences; one possible explanation might be that they are caused by  differences in the treatment given to men and women.  therefore, we investigated gender  differences in treatment by analyzing disease characteristics just prior to initiation of biologic therapy  in patients with ra, ibd, and psoriasis.     methods  patients  for this observational study adult patients with ra, psoriasis and ibd who were treated with  biological agents (etanercept, adalimumab, infliximab, rituximab, abatacept, golimumab,  certolizumab pegol, anakinra, tocilizumab and ustekinumab) between 1999 and 2010 were included.  only the first prescribed biologic for each patients was considered.    data on ra and ibd patients were obtained from two different registries in sweden; the stockholm  tnf follow-up registry (sture) and the remicade (infliximab) registry respectively. in sture,  demographic data, disease characteristics and evaluations of disease activity are registered for all ra  patients treated with biologicals in the karolinska university hospital, stockholm. disease activity  measures are done at inclusion, 3, 6 and 12 months after treatment start and 6-monthly thereafter.  the remicade registry is kept at the same hospital and includes ibd patients treated with infliximab.   data files were extracted from these two registries. missing measurements were manually retrieved  from the hospital patient information system.   since 2007 data on nearly all psoriasis patients given a systemic treatment, including biological  agents, in sweden are kept in a nationwide database; psoreg. data from this registry were obtained  from the published annual report 2010 [16].   patient consent for data registry and subsequent use in research was obtained from patients at the  time of inclusion in all three registries, and local ethical committees approved the use of the data for  these studies. 


7      assessments  for ra and ibd, basic demographic data, including gender and disease activity  measures were collected at a single time point, just prior to the initiation of the first biological; for  psoriasis data were collected at time of inclusion in psoreg. in ra, disease activity was assessed by  the disease activity score (das), using a 28-joint count, which computes a single score out of four  separate measurements (number of tender and swollen joints, patients’ assessment of global disease  activity by visual analog scale (vas) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr)) [21]. for the patients  who had a c-reactive protein (crp) measured, the das28-crp was also computed. a high das28(- crp) indicates more active disease. acute phase reactants measured were esr (mm/h) and/or crp  (mg/l). the number of swollen and tender joints (swollen joint count, sjc, and tender joint count,  tjc, respectively) were counted by the physician out of a standard set of 28 joints. experienced  general pain was rated by the patients on a  0-100 mm vas. both patients and physicians had to rate  the global disease activity. for the patients this was done on a vas scale (0-100 mm) in which 0  means inactive and 100 highly active ra. the doctors used a 5-point scale, ranging from no activity  (0) to maximum activity (5). functional status was measured using the swedish version of the  stanford health assessment questionnaire disability index (haq). the haq scores can range from 0  to 3 where a higher score indicates a higher level of disability [22]. for a subgroup of patients the  hrqol was measured using the euroqol five dimensions utility score (eq-5d). the score is  summarized in a single number which ranges from 0 (death) to 1 (full health), but negative scores are  also possible [23,24].   the disease activity measurements used in ibd were hemoglobin level (hb; g/l), esr,  crp, the harvey bradshaw index (hbi) and the short health scale (shs). the hbi is a tool for  measuring disease activity; it is filled in by both the patient (general wellbeing, abdominal pain, and  number of liquid stools per day) and the physician (based on palpable abdominal mass and presence 


8    of complications). the sum of all single scores is used as the outcome measure; a higher score  indicates more active disease [25].  the shs was used as a short survey to measure hrqol. the shs consist of four questions (severity of  symptoms, influence on daily life, concern about the disease and general wellbeing) which are all  answered by the patient using a 0-100 mm vas. scores from all four questions are separate  outcomes and a higher score represents a worse hrqol [26,27].  for psoriasis two different measures were used: the psoriasis area and severity index  (pasi) and dermatology life quality index (dlqi). the pasi is a clinical measurement which takes into  account both the extensiveness and the severity of the skin symptoms; scores range from 0 (no  psoriasis activity) to 72 points (maximal psoriasis activity). the dlqi is a 10-item dermatology-specific  quality of life measurement which assesses the impact of skin disease on a patient’s hrqol over a 7- day period. the total score ranges from 0 to 30, with higher scores indicating a worse hrqol [28].  for both the dlqi and pasi a score greater than 10 points is considered a ‘high score’ [16,29]. in the  annual report no distinction was made between the different treatment groups for both pasi and  dlqi. thus the data given in this study apply to the total group of psoriasis patients treated with  systemic medication (ie, the worst cases), which also includes non-biological systemic treatment.  all  the different parameters are summarized in table 1.    statistics  statistical analysis was performed using spss v.19.0 statistical software. to compare differences  between men and women, the mann-whitney u test or the independent samples t test was used for  continuous variables, and the x2 test for proportions. for ra and psoriasis the proportions of men  and women prescribed the different biologicals were compared within each disease group.  differences in disease characteristics between the sexes were evaluated for ra, ibd and psoriasis 


9    patients separately; with ra the same was done for each biological. all significance tests were two- tailed and conducted at the 0.05 level.     results  rheumatoid arthritis  1912 ra patients were included in this study, 402 (21%) were men and 1510 (79%) were women.  they received as a first biological either a tnf blocking agent (etanercept, adalimumab, infliximab,  certolizumab pegol or golimumab) or a non-tnf blocking agent (anakinra, rituximab, abatacept or  tocilizumab). the demographic and clinical characteristics are shown in table 2. when biologic  treatment was initiated for the first time in each patient, significant differences between men and  women were found for esr, patients’ global assessment, tjc, haq, das28 and das28-crp. all these  outcome values were higher in women than in men and the differences reached a p-value between  0.00 and 0.02. in contrast, physicians’ global assessment and crp were the same for both sexes, and  the sjc was numerically, but not significantly, higher in males. general pain scores were somewhat  higher in females compared to males, but the difference did not reach statistical significance. the age  at treatment start showed no difference between the sexes but women had a slightly longer disease  duration (p = 0.06).  most patients were prescribed a tnf blocking agents as their first biological of which etanercept,  adalimumab and infliximab made up the majority; but no significant differences were observed in the  proportions of men and women prescribed any of the nine different biologicals (data not shown).  similar percentages of men and women received concurrent therapy with glucocorticoids, nsaids or  conventional dmards. all the biological agents were analyzed separately for gender differences in  disease activity parameters; only for etanercept, adalimumab and infliximab significant differences  similar to those in the total group of ra patients were found (data not shown). gender differences 


10    were also analyzed separately for the year in which treatment was started and a similar pattern as to  the total group of ra patients was observed (data not shown).  thus, in ra the female:male proportion of biologics prescription reflects the overall prevalence of the  disease, and objective disease activity parameters were similar between the sexes, but subjective  experiences of the disease were significantly worse at this time point in female patients. the  compound indices das28 and das28crp showed significant differences that were also driven mostly  by the subjective components tjc and patients’ global assessment of disease activity.    inflammatory bowel disease  131 patients with ibd were included and all had received infliximab as their first biologic. the  majority of the patients were men (69.5%); and most had crohn’s disease (82.4%) or ulcerative colitis  (15.3%), the remaining 2.3% of the patients had another form of ibd. the mean age at treatment  start was the same for men and women (34.4 vs 35.4 respectively, p = 0.71) and also the disease  duration showed no gender difference. the clinical characteristics are shown in figure 1. no  statistically significant differences between men and women were found for any parameters.  although hb level for men was greater than for women, this appeared to reflect the physiological sex  difference, as no gender difference was observed in the proportions of men and women having  laboratory-defined anemia (data not shown). male and female patients who were started on biologic  treatment had similar values on the hbi, but on three out of four questions of the shs women had  numerically higher scores, although these differences did not reach statistical significance. the  disease characteristics were also evaluated for crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis separately and  here the same pattern as with the total group was seen (data not shown). thus, in ibd men and  women at time of biologic initiation have similar disease severity by hbi, but there is a numerical  trend suggesting that female patients experience more symptoms.   


11    psoriasis  in total 2450 patients were enrolled in psoreg and all received a form of systemic treatment; 589  patients (26.0%) were treated with biological medications. in both the overall group and the  biological treatment group the majority of the patients were men (60.0% and 67.1% respectively). in  the whole group approximately 600 patients (24.5%) were between 31 and 45 years old and 800  (32.7%) between 45 and 60 years;  more specific data about mean age or disease duration were not  stated in the report. by pasi, significantly more men than women had a ‘high score’; for the dlqi the  reverse pattern was seen with significantly more women having over ten points. the differences are  summarized in figure 2. the same proportions of men and women were prescribed etanercept,  adalimumab and infliximab; only for ustekinumab was a significant gender difference seen (women  7.7%, men 2.5%; p = 0.01).    discussion  in this study we investigated gender differences in biological treatment by examining  disease characteristics at the time of biologic initiation in ra, ibd and psoriasis. we found that there  was a treatment difference in both ibd and psoriasis, where men received biologic medication more  often than women; and with regard to the disease characteristics we determined that women had  higher scores than men on subjective measurements but not on objective ones in ra and ibd. only in  psoriasis men scored higher on objective disease measurements.  thus, the greater proportion of men versus women receiving biologic treatment in ibd  and psoriasis is not reflected in the population prevalence rates which are similar for both sexes in  both diseases; this in contrast to ra where treatment and population male:female ratios matched  each other. for ra, our data confirm earlier studies that had not noted any gender differences in the  overall use of biological medications [5,7,30,31]. for both psoriasis and ibd, it had previously been 


12    suggested that males receive more (non-)biologic systemic treatment [32,33], and in case of psoriasis  that females receive more topical treatment while men get more phototreatment [34].   the  gender difference we observed in treatment proportions for men and women with ibd and  psoriasis gives rise to a number of hypotheses which could explain these findings. possible reasons  that more men are treated with biologics than women might be that men have more severe disease  activity; men may express treatment preferences for biologics/systemic agents more than women  do; there may be gender differences in treatment access;  the risk/benefit ratio as determined by the  physician may be modified by the patient’s gender; there may be a gender difference in the  effectiveness of biologicals and of treatment alternatives; etc. with respect to the last point an  interesting suggestion was made by nyberg et al, who suggested  that females are more likely to  believe that they can influence their disease themselves and therefore tend to or be given greater  responsibility for their disease (ie, prescribed more self-care topical treatment) [34]. later in-depth  interviews showed the same tendency [35]. this could mean that through more and better use of an  alternative treatment women with psoriasis need biologic treatment less often than men. as some  patients in the psoriasis cohort were already using biologics at inclusion, similar effects with better  adherence to oral medication by women could have influenced pasi scores. but to our knowledge no  literature exist to support this hypothesis. with regard to the risk/benefit ratio, biological therapies  might be considered more dangerous for young women of childbearing age than for men because of  possible teratogenic effects; although for biologicals this is not yet proven [36,37]. this in  combination with age differences might have been of influence on the discrepant gender ratio for  biologic treatment in ibd and psoriasis, with female ra patients being on average 20 years older than  their ibd and psoriasis counterparts when starting with biologicals (54.6 for ra vs 35.4 years for ibd  and between 20 and 40 years for psoriasis [13]).  with regard to the disease characteristics prior to biological therapy initiation  significant gender differences were found in both ra and psoriasis patients and similar numerical  formatted: indent: first line:  0"


13    differences were seen in ibd. in ra females had higher values for the esr, patients’ global  assessment, tjc, haq, das28 and das28crp compared to men at treatment start. one study on  anti-tnf therapy found a similar gender imbalance with regard to objective and subjective  measurements as in this study [38]. furthermore recent unpublished data from arkema et al from  the anti rheumatic therapies in sweden (artis) registry also support a difference in subjective  disease parameters for ra patients starting biologic therapy.[39] most studies on gender in ra used  time points other than biologic initiation, but the results parallel ours [3-6,4039].   biologic medications are now used earlier in the disease than at the time when they  were first introduced. however, in our dataset this did not appear to  modify the observed gender  differences, and a recent analysis of the entire swedish biologics registry also suggests that the  changes over time to do not change the differences between men and women [39].   for the ra population in our study some additional limitations can be considered. we recognize that  the numerical differences in tjc and sjc between the sexes are not large, but believe that these  differences could nonetheless be of clinical importance. measurement of tjc an sjc in rheumatology  practice in the hospital system where these patients were seen is highly standardized (based on the  eular handbook) so that inter-observer variability is minimized. an interesting question is whether  there could be a gender difference in terms of which specific joints or joint groups are inflamed.  unfortunately, our database does not record the individual joints so that we cannot address this  interesting possibility.       in psoriasis both the pasi and the dlqi showed a gender difference, with men more  often having high pasi scores and women more often high dlqi scores. our findings for the dlqi  parallel a few but not all studies on quality of life in psoriasis [18-20,410]. with ibd the shs, which  can be regarded as a short quality of life assessment, tended to be higher in women. this matches  formatted: indent: first line:  0.91", line spacing:  double formatted: line spacing:  double formatted: english (u.k.)


14    earlier research where female gender was found to be a predictor of impaired health related quality  of life and level of concern [421-443].   although different assessments were used for the three diseases, a general  comparison can be made in that in all three diseases the gender imbalances seems to occur only in  the subjective measurements such as pain, functional status and quality of life. these results support  the hypothesis that the inherent biology of the diseases is similar for both genders, but that females  experience their illness worse and consequently have a higher symptomatic disease burden. for ra  patients this is further supported by a study where women had more symptoms than men despite  similar radiographic joint damage [30]. the higher esr in female ra patients  could be an exception,  but women are known to have a higher esr levels compared to men, which is most likely due to  hormonal factors and a difference in haemotocrit concentration [39,454].  in the literature regarding gender differences in ra part of the discussion has focused  on the possible non-sex neutrality of the disease activity measurements used. for psoriasis and ibd  the same questions may apply. studies of outcomes in all three diseases are ongoing. pain and  related measurements are frequently discussed as being non-sex neutral. women are more likely  than men to experience different kinds of recurrent pains and also report more severe levels of pain  [465,476]. moreover, with the same noxious stimuli women experience more pain [487]. these  factors can consequently be of influence on pain measurements (tjc, global pain), assessments in  which pain is included (das28, shs-symptoms, hbi) or those which are affected by pain (haq, dlqi,  shs). in the case of ra concomitant fibromyalgia could influence pain measurements as well [49].   another example is the haq score, which is known to be higher in females with ra [5,6,30,5048];  and this could be attributed to the fact that women have less muscle strength, but it is also possible  that men overestimate their functional capacity or that women have higher pain scores [30,48].  therefore the higher haq scores might be caused by the properties of the haq rather than by ra;  formatted: indent: first line:  0"


15    however, it is interesting to notice that in the healthy population no sex differences in haq scores  are observed [5149,520].   although not formally the studied the pasi might also be influenced by gender. the component  ‘scaling’ is immediately improved after the use of emollients, and even experienced scorers would  probably give a lower score for a skin that is just treated with emollients. as stated earlier women  are more likely to adhere to topical treatment and in consequence this could mean systemic  underscoring of the pasi in females.  thus, it is not clear whether standard disease assessments are sex-neutral, but there is also another  way of looking at this. if for example women do feel more pain with the same stimulus can it then  really be said that the disease is the same?  and are fewer compensation resources enough to reason  to disregard a gender difference? it would seem that the subjective disease experience may to some  extent be discounted, while for the patient this is most likely to be the most important part.  in summary,  we observed gender differences in disease characteristics at the start of  biologic /systemic treatment in ra, ibd, and psoriasis, with an over representation of men in the  latter two diseases, and higher symptomatic burdengreater disease impact and worse quality of life  scores in women with all three diseases, suggesting a potential subtle undertreatment of women  with these diseases.  we note that undertreatment in ra could then also partly explain the worse  outcomes previously reported in longitudinal studies for women with ra.   this study has a number of limitations, being a retrospective observational study with  all data having been collected at clinical visits. in addition it must be noted that the psoriasis results  come from an annual report and are not computed using the raw data. furthermore, some of the  measurements in psoriasis were done after treatment initiation; the real gender difference might  therefore be even bigger. the pasi and dlqi scores were only given for the total group, and not  separately for each treatment, therefore subgroup analysis was not possible; this makes comparison  with ra and ibd more difficult.  


16      conclusion  women with ra and psoriasis scored significantly higher on subjective, but not objective, disease  activity measures than men and the same trend was seen in ibd. this indicates a greater burden  impact of disease in women at the same level of treatment. these findings might suggest that in all  three inflammatory diseases subjective measures are somewhat discounted in the therapeutic  decision making process, which could indicate an systematic undertreatment in females.     abbreviations  ra: rheumatoid arthritis  ibd: inflammatory bowel disease  hrqol: health related quality of life  esr: erythrocyte sedimentation rate  crp: c-reactive protein  hb: hemoglobin  das: disease activity score  haq: health assessment questionnaire  vas: visual analog scale  tjc: tender joint count  sjc: swollen joint count  eq-5d: euroqol five dimensions utility score  hbi: harvey bradshaw index  shs: short health scale  pasi: psoriasis area and severity index  dlqi: dermatology life quality index 


17      competing interest    the authors declare that they have no competing interests.     list of contributors  nl and rfvv are the major contributors responsible for study design, data analysis and manuscript  writing. rb and fn provided patient data and participated in manuscript writing. all authors had full  access to all of the data in the study and can take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the  accuracy of the data analysis. all authors read and approved  the final manuscript.  this study was in part supported by the center for gender medicine at the karolinska institute.    acknowledgements  we would like to thank hawa camara and anette storlåhls for their help with retrieving patient data  from the sture and remicade registry respectively. we also would like to thank marcus schmitt- egenolf for providing the psoreg annual report.    references  1. scott dl, wolfe f, huizinga twj. rheumatoid arthritis. lancet  2010,376:1094-1108.  2. van vollenhoven rf. treatment of rheumatoid arthritis state of the art 2009. nat rev  rheumatol  2009,5:531-41.  3. iikuni n, sato e, hoshi m, inoue e, taniguchi a, hara m, tomatsu t, kamatani n, yamanaka h.  the influence of sex on patients with rheumatoid arthritis in a large observational cohort. j  rheumatol  2009,36:508-11.  4. sokka t, toloza s, cutolo m et al. women, men, and rheumatoid arthritis: analyses of  disease activity, disease characteristics, and treatments in the quest-ra study. arthritis  res ther  2009,11(1):r7. 


18    5. tengstrand b, ahlmén m, hafström i. the influence of sex on rheumatoid arthritis: a  prospective study of onset and outcome after 2 years. j rheumatol  2004,31(2):214-22.  6. kuiper s, van gestel am, swinkels hl, de boo tm, da silva jap, van riel plcm. influence of  sex, age, and menopausal state on the course of early rheumatoid arthritis. j rheumatol  2001,28:1809-16.  7. forslind k, hafström i, ahlmén m, svensson b; barfot study group. sex: a major predictor  of remission in early rheumatoid arthritis? ann rheum dis 2007,66(1):46-52.   8. weyand cm, schmidt d, wagner u, goronzy jj. the influence of sex on the phenotype of  rheumatoid arthritis. arthritis rheum 1998,41(5):817-22.  9. rutgeerts p, vermeire s, van assche g. biological therapies for inflammatory bowel  diseases. gastroenterology 2009,136:1182-97.  10. wagtmans mj, verspaget hw, lamers cbhw, van hogezand ra. gender-related differences  in the clinical course of crohn’s disease.  am j gastroenterol. 2001;96:1541-46.  11. bernell o, lapidus a, hellers g. risk factors for surgery and postoperative recurrence in  crohn’s disease. ann surg 2000,231(1):38-45.  12. hofer b, böttger t, hernandez-richter t, seifert jk, junginger t. the impact of clinical types  of disease manifestation on the risk of early postoperative recurrence in crohn’s disease.  hepatogastroenterology  2000,48(37):152-5.  13. romberg-camps mjl, dagnelie pc, kester adm, hesselink-van de kruijs mam, cilissen m,  engels lgjb, van deursen c, hameeteman wha, wolters fl, russel mgvm, stockbrügger  rw. influence of phenotype at diagnosis and of other potential prognostic factors on the  course of inflammatory bowel disease. am j gasroenterol 2009,104:371-83.  14. söderlund s,granath f, broström o, karlén p, löfberg r, ekbom a, askling j. inflammatory  bowel disease confers a lower risk of colorectal cancer to females than to males.  gastroenterology  2010,138:1697-1703. 


19    15. macdonald a, burden ad. psoriasis: advances in pathophysiology and management.  postgrad med j 2007,83:690-7.  16. schmitt-egenolf, m. det nationella kvalitetsregistret för systembehandling av psoriasis,  psoreg information. läkemedelsverket 2011,4:56-63.  17. christophers e. psoriasis – epidemiology and clinical spectrum. clin exp dermatol  2001,26(4):314-20.  18. schmid-ott g, künsebeck hw, jäger b, sittig u, hofste n, malewski p, lamprecht f.  significance of the stigmatization experience of psoriasis patients: a 1-year follow-up of the  illness and its psychosocial consequences in men and women. acta derm venereol  2005,85(1):27-32.  19. sampogna f, chren mm, melchi cf, pasquini p, tabolli s, abeni d; italian multipurpose  psoriasis research on vital experiences (improve) study group. age, gender, quality of life  and psychological distress in patients hospitalized with psoriasis. br j dermatol  2006,154(2):325-31.  20. de korte j, sprangers ma, mombers fm, bos jd. quality of life in patients with psoriasis: a  systematic literature review. j investig dermatol symp proc 2004,9(2):140-7.  21. prevoo ml, van ’t hof ma, kuper hh, van leeuwen ma, van de putte lb, van riel pl.  modified disease activity scores that include twenty-eight-joint counts. development and  validation in a prospective longitudinal study of patients with rheumatoid arthritis.  arthritis rheum 1995,38(1):44-8.  22. ekdahl c, eberhardt k, andersson sj, svensson b. assessing disability in patients with  rheumatoid arthritis. use of a swedish version of the stanford health assessment  questionnaire. scand j rheumatol 1988,17(4):263-71.  23. euroqol group. euroqol–a new facility for the measurement of health-related quality of  life. the euroqol group. health policy 1990,16:199–208.  


20    24. hurst np, kind p, ruta d, hunter m, stubbings a. measuring health-related quality of life in  rheumatoid arthritis: validity, responsiveness and reliability of euroqol (eq-5d). br j  rheumatol 1997,36(5):551-9.  25. harvey rf, bradshaw jm. a simple index of crohn's-disease activity. lancet  1980,1(8167):514.  26. stjernman h, grännö c, järnerot g, ockander l, tysk c, blomberg b, ström m, hjortswang h.  short health scale: a valid, reliable, and responsive instrument for subjective health  assessment in crohn's disease. inflamm bowel dis 2008,14(1):47-52.  27. hjortswang h, järnerot g, curman b, sandberg-gertzén h, tysk c, blomberg b, almer s,  ström m. the short health scale: a valid measure of subjective health in ulcerative colitis.  scand j gastroenterol 2006,41(10):1196-203.  28. finlay ay, khan gk. dermatology life quality index (dlqi)--a simple practical measure for  routine clinical use. clin exp dermatol 1994,19(3):210-6.   29. jacobson cc, kimball ab. rethinking the psoriasis area and severity index: the impact of  area should be increased. br j dermatol 2004,151(2):381-7.  30. ahlmén m, svensson b, albertsson k, forslind k, hafström i; barfot study group. influence  of gender on assessments of disease activity and function in early rheumatoid arthritis in  relation to radiographic joint damage. ann rheum dis 2010,69:230-3.  31. dewitt em, lin l, glick ha, anstrom kj, schulman ka, reed sd. pattern and predictors of the  initiation of biologic agents for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in the united states:  an analysis using a large observational data bank. clin ther 2009,31(8):1871-80.  32. blumenstein i, bock h, zosel c, dignass au, hartmann f, zeuzem s, stein jm, schroeder o.  are there gender-related differences in the therapeutic management of patients suffering  from inflammatory bowel disease? subgroup analysis of a prospective multicenter online- based trial. z gastroenterol 2009,47(10):1045-51. 


21    33. hotard rs, feldman sr, fleischer ab jr. sex-specific differences in the treatment of severe  psoriasis. j am acad dermatol 2000,42(4):620-3.  34. nyberg f, osika i, evengård b. “the laundry bag project”– unequal distribution of  dermatological healthcare resources for male and female psoriatic patients in sweden. int j  dermatol 2008,47(2):144-9.  35. waernulf l, moberg c, henriksson ew, evengard b, nyberg f.  patients' views on care and  treatment after phototherapy for psoriasis and atopic eczema including a gender  perspective.  j dermatolog treat 2008,19(4):233-40.  36. osting vc, carter jd. a safety assessment of tumor necrosis factor antagonists during  pregnancy. expert opin drug saf 2010,9(3):421-9.  37. de man ya, dolhain rjem, steegers eap, hazes jmw. reumatische ziekten bij kinderwens  en zwangerschap. ned tijdschr geneeskd 2011,155:a2622.   38. kristensen le, kapetanovic mc, gülfe a, söderlin m, saxne t, geborek p. predictors of  response to anti-tnf therapy according to acr and eular criteria in patients with  established ra: results from the south swedish arthritis treatment group register.  rheumatology 2008,47:495-99.  38.39. arkema ev, neovius m, joelsson jk, simard jf, van vollenhoven rf. is there a sex bias  in prescribing anti-tumour necrosis factor medications to patients with rheumatoid  arthritis? a nation-wide cross-sectional study. ann rheum dis. 2012 apr 13. [epub ahead of  print]  39.40. radovits bj, fransen j, van riel plcm, laan rfjm. influence of age and gender on the  28-joint disease activity score (das28) in rheumatoid arthritis. ann rheum dis  2008,67:1127-31.  40.41. gupta ma, gupta ak. age and gender differences in the impact of psoriasis on  quality of life. int j dermatol 1995,34(10):700-3.  formatted: font: not italic, do not check spelling or grammar formatted: font: calibri formatted: font: calibri, bold formatted: font: calibri, italic formatted: font: italic, dutch (netherlands)


22    41.42. bernklev t, jahnsen j, aadland e, sauar j, schulz j, lygren i, et al & the ibsen study  group. health-related quality of life in patients with inflammatory bowel disease five  years after the initial diagnosis. scand j gastroenterol 2004,39:365–373.  42.43. casellas f, lópez-vivancos j, casado a, malagelada jr. factors affecting health related  quality of life of patients with inflammatory bowel disease. qual life res 2002,11(8):775- 81.  43.44. stjernman h, tysk c, almer s, ström m, hjortswang h. worries and concerns in a large  unselected cohort of patients with crohn's disease. scand j gastroenterol 2010,45(6):696- 706  44.45. dinant gj, knottnerus ja, van wersch jwj. discriminating ability of the erythrocyte  sedimentation-rate – a prospective study in general practice. br j gen pract 1991,41:365- 70.  45.46. unruh am. gender variations in clinical pain experience. pain 1996,65:123-67.   46.47. bingefors k, isacson d. epidemiology, co-morbidity, and impact on health-related  quality of life of self-reported headache and musculoskeletal pain--a gender perspective.  eur j pain 2004,8(5):435-50.  48. riley jl 3rd, robinson me, wise ea, myers cd, fillingim rb. sex differences in the perception  of noxious experimental stimuli: a meta-analysis. pain 1998,74(2-3):181-7.  49. ranzolin a, brenol jc, bredemeier m, guarienti j, rizzatti m, feldman d, xavier rm.  association of concomitant fibromyalgia with worse disease activity score in 28 joints,  health assessment questionnaire, and short form 36 scores in patients with rheumatoid  arthritis. arthritis rheum 2009,61(6):794-800.  47.50. häkkinen a, kautiainen h, hannonen p, ylinen j, mäkinen h, sokka t. muscle strength,  pain, and disease activity explain individual subdimensions of the health assessment  questionnaire disability index, especially in women with rheumatoid arthritis. ann rheum  dis 2006,65:30-4.  formatted: font: not italic


23    48.51. krishnan e, sokka t, häkkinen a, hubert h, hannonen p. normative values for the  health assessment questionnaire disability index: benchmarking disability in the general  population. arthritis rheum 2004,50(3):953-60.  49.52. björk ma, thyberg is, skogh t, gerdle bu. hand function and activity limitation  according to health assessment questionnaire in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and  healthy referents: 5-year follow-up of predictors of activity limitation (the swedish tira  project). j rheumatol 2007,34(2):296-302.    figures  figure 1:   title: clinical characteristics just prior to treatment start in ibd patients  legend: values are mean. significant values are indicated by brackets. esr, erythrocyte  sedimentation rate; crp, c-reactive protein; hb, hemoglobin level; shs, short health scale.    figure 2:  title: proportions of high and low pasi and dlqi scores in psoriasis patients  legend: values are proportions. significant values are indicated by brackets. pasi, psoriasis area and  severity index; dlqi, dermatology life quality index.    tables    table 1  parameters for disease activity in ra, ibd and psoriasis  measurement definition  rheumatoid arthritis   1. swollen joint count (sjc) number of swollen joints as determined by the  physician out of a standard set of 28 joints  2. tender joint count (tjc) number of joints tender to palpation (as for sjc)  3. patients’ assessment of pain measured by visual analog scale 0-100 mm(vas)  4. patients’ assessment of global disease  activity  measured by vas 0-100 mm 


24    5. physicians’ assessment of global disease  activity  measured on a 5-point scale which ranges from  ‘no activity’ to ‘maximal activity’  6. acute phase reactant esr (mm/h) and/or crp (mg/l)  7. health-assessment questionnaire (haq) assessment of functional status (0-3 points)  8. eq-5d assessment of health related quality of life (0-1)  9. disease activity score (das28) assessment of disease activity computed out of  sjc, tjc, esr and patients’ assessment of global  disease activity, based on 28 joint. das28-crp  when crp is used instead of esr  inflammatory bowel disease  1. hemoglobin level in g/l  2. acute phase reactant esr (mm/h) and/or crp (mg/l)  3. harvey bradshaw index (hbi) assessment of disease activity filled in by both  patient and physician  4. short health scale (shs) assessment of health related quality of life on  four domains, measured by vas 0-100 mm  psoriasis  1. psoriasis area and severity index (pasi) assessment of extensiveness and severity of skin  lesions consisting of four components; scaling,  redness, extension and elevation (0-72 points)  2. dermatology life quality index (dlqi) assessment of the impact of skin disease on  health related quality of life (0-30 points)  esr, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; crp, c-reactive protein    table 2  demographic and clinical characteristics just prior to treatment start in ra patients   men women p-value  no. of patients (%) 402 (21%) 1510 (79%)   age at treatment start in  years  54.7 (13.7) 54.6 (14.5) 0.93  disease duration in years 14.7 (10.8) 15.9 (11.2) 0.06  esr 30.1 (21.9) 33.1 (23.3) 0.02§  crp 25.5 (30.1) 24.9 (31.4) 0.73  physicians’ global assessment 2.2 (0.8) 2.3 (0.7) 0.38 


25    patients’ global assessment 54.3 (24.3) 58.7 (24.1) 0.00*  pain 54.8 (23.9) 56.9 (24.2) 0.16  swollen joint count 9.1 (5.9) 8.8 (5.5) 0.36  tender joint count 7.8 (6.3) 8.7 (6.1) 0.01*  haq 1.13 (0.68) 1.34 (0.68) 0.00*  das28 5.07 (1.37) 5.39 (1.21) 0.00*  das28-crp 4.87 (1.25) 5.06 (1.14) 0.01*  eq-5d 0.49 (0.36) 0.50 (0.30) 0.89  values are mean (sd), except number of patients (percentage). bold values are significant. esr,  erythrocyte sedimentation rate; crp, c-reactive protein; haq, health assessment questionnaire;  das28(crp), disease activity score using 28 joints (crp); eq-5d, euroqol five dimensions utility  score.  *independent sample t test  §mann-whitney u test   


&"#$%&'(''!"#$#%&"'%(&)&%*+)#,*#%,'-.,*'/)#0)'*0'*)+&*1+$*',*&)*'#$'/3$'/&*#+$*,' ' σ&".+,'&)+'1+&$6'⊥#8$#9#%&$*':&".+,'&)+'#$;#%&*+;'<='<)&%>+*,6'(⊥ζa'+)=*()0%=*+',+;#1+$*&*#0$')&*+b' !ζωa'!d)+&%*#:+'/)0*+#$b',<a'(+108"0<#$'"+:+"b'⊥,⊥a'⊥(0)*',+&"*('⊥%&"+6' ' ω*+,+(' figure 1


!"#! $%#%$% !%#% & " '& '" $& $" !& !" (& ω*⊥/-.'& $>ψ/-.'& ∆34 τ6734 &"#$%&'(--ω86968:;64<-6=->;?>-ω*⊥/-@4a-$>ψ/-<b683-;4-9<68;@<;<-9@:;34:<-- - σ@de3<-@83-986968:;64<#-⊥;?4;=;b@4:-a;==3834b3<-@83-;4a;b@:3a-fg-f8@bh3:<#-ω*⊥/i-ω<68;@<;<-*83@-@4a- ⊥3j38;:g-/4a3kl-$>ψ/i-$387@:6d6?g->;=3-ψe@d;:g-/4a3k#- - )*+,++' )*+,++' figure 2
