

the ukcat-12 study:  educational attainment,  aptitude test performance, demographic  and socio-economic contextual factors  as predictors of first year outcome  in a cross-sectional collaborative study of  twelve uk medical schools    i c mcmanusa,b  chris dewberryc  sandra nicholsond  jonathan s dowelle  a academic centre for medical education  division of medical education,  university college london  gower street  london wc1e 6bt, uk    b research department of clinical, educational and health psychology,  division of psychology and language sciences  university college london  gower street  london wc1e 6bt, uk    c department of organizational psychology  birkbeck, university of london   malet street, bloomsbury   london wc1e 7hx, uk    d institute of health science education  queen mary london  turner street  london e1 2ad, uk    e undergraduate medical education  ninewells hospital & medical school  dundee dd1 9sy  scotland, uk   


  1    abstract  background.  most uk medical schools use aptitude tests during student selection,  but large-scale studies of predictive validity are rare.  this study assesses the united  kingdom clinical aptitude test (ukcat), and its four sub-scales, along with measures  of educational attainment, individual, and contextual socio-economic background  factors, as predictors of performance in the first year of medical school training.   methods.  a prospective study of 4,811 students in 12 uk medical schools  taking  ukcat in 2006 to 2008 as a part of medical school application, for whom first year  medical school examination results were available in 2008 to 2010.  results.   ukcat scores and educational attainment measures (gce: a-levels, etc; or  sqa: scottish highers, etc) were significant predictors of outcome. ukcat predicted  outcome better in female students than male students, and in mature than non- mature students. incremental validity of ukcat taking educational attainment into  account was significant, but small. medical school performance was also affected by  sex (male students performing less well), ethnicity (non-white students performing  less well), and a contextual measure of secondary schooling, students from  secondary schools with greater average attainment at a-level (irrespective of public  or private sector) performing less well.  multilevel modelling showed no differences  between medical schools in predictive ability of the various measures. ukcat sub- scales predicted similarly, except that verbal reasoning correlated positively with  performance on theory examinations, but negatively with skills assessments.  conclusions.  this collaborative study in twelve medical schools shows the power of  large-scale studies of medical education for answering previously unanswerable but  important questions about medical student selection, education and training. ukcat  has predictive validity as a predictor of medical school outcome, particularly in  mature applicants to medical school. ukcat offers small but significant incremental  validity which is operationally valuable where medical schools are making selection  decisions based on incomplete measures of educational attainment. the study  confirms the validity of using all the existing measures of educational attainment in  full at the time of selection decision-making. contextual measures provide little  additional predictive value, except that students from high attaining secondary  schools perform less well, an effect  previously shown for uk universities in general.     keywords:  medical student selection / educational attainment / aptitude tests /  ukcat/ socio-economic factors / contextual measures 


  1      background  for many years the primary criterion used to select medical school applicants  world-wide has been measures of educational attainment. in the uk, gce a-levels,  for those educated in england, wales and northern ireland, and sqa highers for  most of those educated in scotland, have been the norm. a-levels have been shown  to be valid predictors of outcome, both during the medical course[1] and later in  medical careers[2], and for university education in general[3], and more generally in  europe, secondary school grades are predictive of university performance [4].  educational attainment is also important in medical student selection in many  countries, such as australia, denmark, iran, the netherlands [5], new zealand, and  thailand [6].  however in recent years the continued reliance on such attainment  measures as the sole or principal basis for medical student selection has been  questioned for three reasons.  first, a-levels and scottish highers, which are typically  taken in the final year of secondary school, have over the past two decades shown  continual increases in grades attained (so-called, ‘grade inflation’).  the result is that  a large proportion of uk applicants to medical schools now achieve the highest  grades (a ceiling effect), so that discriminating between them for the purpose of  selection is increasingly problematic.  second, selection on the basis of a-level and  scottish higher grades may be construed as unfair, because students who have  attended selective schools, including independent secondary schools charging high  fees, tend to obtain higher grades than others, although this in part may reflect  different intake profiles. third, there are concern that academic assessment alone  may not necessarily select the candidates that possess the behavioural or non- cognitive attributes thought desirable in medical students and doctors. as a  consequence, able but economically or socially disadvantaged children attending  comprehensive secondary schools might be less likely to obtain a place at medical  school than students of equal ability attending selective or private sector secondary  schools.  arising from such concerns has also been a growing awareness of the  paucity of large-scale, longitudinal studies which have examined performance in  medical school in relation to a wide range of measures collected during selection.  without such studies it is difficult to assess the validity and defensibility of the  processes currently used to select medical students.    in response to these challenges, most uk medical schools in recent years  have used aptitude tests as a supplementary selection technique. an aptitude test 


  2    usually consists of a series of multiple choice sub-tests. sub-tests are developed to  assess specific aptitudes thought to be relevant for performance at medical school  (e.g. numerical ability and verbal ability).  unlike secondary school examinations,  which measure attainment in relation to a particular discipline (e.g. chemistry),  aptitude tests are specifically designed to measure intellectual and behavioural  capacity, and the potential to perform well in a particular role. furthermore,  aptitude tests offer considerable operational advantages: they can be taken in  standardized settings by anyone, whatever their cultural or educational background,  at geographical locations all over the world; they can assess people against items for  which the difficulty level has been pre-established; they can be completed in a short  time (typically less than three hours); and candidates’ performance on the test can  be computed immediately. although aptitude tests are used in medical selection in  many countries including australia [7], chile [8], germany [9,10], pakistan [11], italy  [12], mexico [13], switzerland [14], the united states [15,16] and the uk [17,18],  research on the extent to which they successfully predict medical performance is  patchy. given the high-stakes nature of medical selection it is clearly important to  establish the predictive validity of aptitude tests, and the extent to which they add  value to more traditional approaches to selection such as previous educational  attainment, using data sets large enough to provide substantial statistical power.   here we report the results of the first large-scale analysis of the predictive and  incremental validity of ukcat, the aptitude test used in the selection of medical  students in most uk medical schools.  aptitude tests can be used as a stand-alone selection device or, more  typically, to supplement the existing information on which selection decisions are  made, such as a candidate’s secondary school attainment, ucas personal statements  and medical school interview performance.  because these tests can be specifically  designed to differentiate between highly able candidates, and to do so in relation to  the particular characteristics required in the medical profession, they can potentially  discriminate appropriately between those with equally good attainment at a level  and scottish highers. in addition, by measuring the extent to which candidates’  possess aptitudes relevant to the medical profession, rather than their level of  school-related educational attainment, aptitude tests may help to widen  participation in medicine[19].   the two main aptitude tests currently in operation in the united kingdom are  the uk clinical aptitude test (ukcat)[20], which is the principle interest of the  present study, and the biomedical admissions test (bmat)[21,22].  for admission in 


  3    2013, ukcat is being used by 26 uk medical schools, and bmat by four uk medical  schools. if aptitude tests are to be of added value in addressing the problem of  ceiling effects in educational qualifications they must predict the future performance  of medical school candidates over and above that provided by a-levels and scottish  highers[23]. in addition, if they are to widen participation in the medical profession,  it is desirable that scores on ukcat and bmat should be less strongly associated  with selective secondary schooling than a levels or scottish highers.  at present, both ukcat and bmat are somewhat controversial[23,24],  mainly because of concerns about how well they predict performance at medical  school. however, there is also concern over the cost deterring poorer applicants and  the effects of coaching[25], which in general can have an effect size of about .26  [26]. to date there have been four studies of the predictive ability of ukcat[17,27- 29], all of which are moderately small (ns = 292, 307, 204 and 146), and have widely  varying conclusions, from a study suggesting the test provides no significant  prediction[30] to claims of significant predictive ability[17].  additionally, one  study[31] found no relationship between ukcat scores and scores on admissions  interviews.  an important consideration in determining the validity of any aptitude  test is that as well as demonstrating predictive validity in its own right, it should also  show incremental validity when used with current and accepted methods of  selection, which at present for medicine are primarily achievement tests taken in  secondary education, coupled in many cases with interviews. that is particularly  important as tests such as the american mcat, which have both aptitude and  attainment components, typically find that most of the prediction is due to the  attainment component, rather than the aptitude component[32].   given the widespread adoption of ukcat for medical school selection since  its introduction in 2006[33], a more comprehensive examination of the extent to  which the test can successfully predict performance and widen participation is  required.  in this article we address this issue by examining the relationships  between multiple  predictors of medical school performance (including ukcat, a  levels and scottish highers, and a broad range of contextual and socio-cultural  measures, including selective schooling), in relation to the first year medical school  performance of 4,811 students studying at 12 english and scottish medical schools in  three cohorts who took ukcat in 2006-8, entered medical school in 2007-2009, and  completed their first year in 2008-2010.    although the primary impetus for the present study was to evaluate ukcat in  the context of medical student selection, the ukcat-12 study can also be used to 


  4    address a wider set of important issues. as yet there has been no large-scale,  prospective study of medical student performance drawing on a wide range of  measures which might predict that performance (including detailed socio-economic  background measures) across a substantial sample of medical schools.   ukcat-12  provides exactly that, giving not only a platform from which to ask many questions  about the nature of medical student selection and education and the assessment of  the effects of a large number of different background measures, but also allowing a  determination of the  extent to which different measures might have different  predictive values in different medical schools. although, therefore, a prime interest  of the present study is to evaluate ukcat, it also represents the first, long-term,  large-scale study of medical student training in the uk. important features of the  present analysis are that the sample is large (nearly 5,000 students), it is diverse and  representative of a range of medical schools (twelve medical schools taking part), it  is extended over time (the data being collected across several years), and there is a  ‘hard’ outcome measure in the form of medical school examination results on a  continuous scale.  that means the current study has high statistical power, and also  makes it possible to compare medical schools in order to assess the degree to which  the conclusions can be generalized across medical schools.  thus, the accumulating  database associated with the ukcat provides an important opportunity not only to  assess the effectiveness of the ukcat, but also to assess the influence of a far  broader range of issues concerning how educational, demographic, and social factors  influence medical school outcome, including those assessed with the ‘contextual  measures’ which will soon be available for routine use during selection.  aims of the analysis   the present analysis takes into account the aims which ukcat set for itself,[20,34] as  well as various previous studies of aptitude tests (and the criticisms of those studies).  it therefore looks at:  o the predictive validity of a-levels and scottish highers for performance in  the first year of medical school studies.   o the predictive validity of ukcat for performance in the first year of  medical school studies.  o the incremental validity of ukcat over and above existing measures of  educational attainment, both gcses/as-levels/a-levels and scottish  highers/advanced highers. 


  5    o the specific predictive ability, with and without taking educational  attainment into account, of the four subscales of ukcat.  o an assessment of whether 'theory 'and 'skills' measures at medical school  are predicted differently by educational attainment and ukcat aptitude  measures.  o an assessment of whether the predictive validity of any of the measures  is different in the twelve medical schools that have taken part in the  study.  o the role of demographic and socio-economic factors in moderating any of  the findings.  it should be noted that the present study is restricted to medical school entrants,  and therefore it cannot look more generally at how social and other factors relate to  educational attainment and ukcat performance in the entire set of medical school  applicants (rather than entrants). the analysis also considers only simple predictor- outcome correlations, and makes no attempt to calculate construct validity, taking  into account the unreliability of predictor and outcome measures, restriction of  range due to selection, and the right-censorship of predictor variables such as a-level  scores. all of that is considered in a separate paper, which carries out a meta- regression of construct validity not only in the ukcat-12 study, but also in five other  cohort studies [35].    methods   the primary dataset for the ukcat-12 study consists of the 4,811 students in three  separate cohorts, who entered medical school in 2007, 2008 or 2009, and for whom  outcome measures were available at the end of their first academic year. for those  cohorts, ukcat was used in selection by 23, 25 and 26 medical schools. the  secondary datasets contained data on a range of other measures, including prior  educational achievement, socioeconomic background, etc.. many of the secondary  measures are missing, either for structural reasons (e.g. some socio-economic  measures are only available for england; a-levels were not available for mature  entrants; etc.) and others were also sporadically missing, probably mostly at random.  some secondary measures do not describe individual students, but instead are  contextual variables, describing not the students themselves, but features of the  educational and socioeconomic environment in which the students lived prior to 


  6    joining medical school (e.g. aggregated measures of the attainment of the secondary  school attended, socio-economic measures of the local community where the  student lived, etc.). contextual measures need to be treated with care, but have  been included not only for their sociological interest, but also because similar  measures are now provided routinely by ucas, and have been shown to relate to  achievement at the bmat aptitude test[36]. table 1 summarises the many measures  which were in the analysis, and more detailed information can also be found in the  ukcat-12 technical report[34] (this document is available for reviewers at  www.ucl.ac.uk/medical-education/resources/documents/technical_reportv40.pdf   ). the measures can be divided into six broad categories.   1. medical school outcome data. medical schools provided information on  overall outcome on a four point scale (passed all exams at first attempt;  passed after resitting exams; repeating the first year; and leaving the course),  which we called outcomefirstyear4pt. average percentage marks on  assessments were also available for most students (overallmark), and for  many students separate marks were also available for ‘theory’ and ‘skills’  assessments (theorymark and skillsmark; see table 1). the overall, theory  and skills marks were all based on marks attained at the first attempt.   2. prior educational attainment, etc..  information on prior educational  attainment was provided by ucas, consisting of scottish higher and  advanced higher results for students from scotland (collectively sqa  qualifications), and a-level, as-level and gcse results for other students  (collectively gce qualifications). educational qualifications are always  complex to analyse, because different candidates take different examinations  with different structures and grading schemes, and candidates have chosen  to study different subjects. four medical schools were from scotland and  eight from the rest of the uk, entrants to the former mostly, but not entirely,  taking scottish highers rather than a-levels. no easy solution is possible for  the difficult problem of equating the two different sets of results[37], and we  have followed the approach of tiffin et al[19] in converting scottish highers  and a-levels to z-scores, which can then be combined. the technical  report[34] describes an extensive set of preliminary analyses of the wide  range of different measures of attainment (see table 1). briefly, each of the  42 derived scores for a-levels, as-levels and gcses was correlated with 


  7    overallscore (tr table 1*). multiple regression suggested that only a subset  of eight measures (tr table 3) showed independent predictions of outcome.  missing values for these eight measures were replaced by em imputation, the  resulting 8x8  correlation matrix factor analysed, the first principle  component extracted (which has a mean of zero and sd of one), and scores  on that used as an optimal summary measure of attainment at a-level, as- level and gcse.  a similar process was carried out for the 51 derived  measures of highers, ‘highers plus’ and advanced highers, each of which was  correlated with overallscore (tr table 2). ten independent predictors were  found, missing values replaced by imputation, and the first principle  component extracted (tr table 4). since the principle components for the  two analyses were both on standardised scales, they could be combined to  provide an optimal summary measure of educationalattainment for the  majority of students. educational attainment measures differ between  medical schools and between cohorts, but because the main interest in this  study is prediction within medical schools, we have standardised    educationalattainment within cohorts and medical schools, resulting in the  variable we call zeducationalattainment.  it should be noted that educational  qualifications were only available in most cases for non-mature students (age  less than 21). although statistically optimal, and hence good for assessing  underlying processes using as much information as possible, we realise that  zeducationalattainment does not reflect the current selection processes, and  therefore we also report results for the more conventional measures of three  best a-levels, four best as-levels, nine best gcses, five best scottish highers,  five best scottish “highers plus” (which includes finer definition of bands  within grades), and best scottish advanced higher.    3. ukcat scores. the main measures from ukcat were the scores on the  cognitive tests, the total score, ukcattotal, and the scores on the four  subtests, ukcatabstractreasoning,  ukcatdecisionanalysis,   ukcatquantitativereasoning and ukcatverbalreasoning. details of the  tests can be found elsewhere[20,38-42]. formats were unchanged across the  three cohorts. reliabilities are summarised in the technical report[34] (p.18).  mean ukcat scores differed both between medical schools, and scores also  rose across the cohorts, the differences being meaningful since ukcat is                                                                    * tr table 1 refers to “technical report table 1”. 


  8    statistically equated across cohorts using item-response theory. as with  educational attainment, ukcat scores have therefore been standardised as z- scores within medical schools and cohorts, since it is performance within  medical school and cohort which is of interest. as well as scores on ukcat,  we also had measures of the date of taking the test  (ukcatdayoftakingpctilerank), the number of items not answered  (ukcatskipped), whether there was a time extension because of special  needs (ukcatexamseriescode), and the contextual measure of the  experience of a student’s secondary school in taking ukcat  (ukcatcandperschool).   4. schooling measures. the principal measure was selectiveschool, which  used data from ucas and dfes to identify candidates educated at selective  secondary schools. three contextual measures were also used,  dfesshrunkva, dfes.avepointstudent, and dfes.avepointscore,  which assessed the performance of students at the secondary school  attended by the student in our study (see table 1 for details).  5. demographic measures. measures were available of nationality (uk or  non-uk), sex, age, and ethnicity (classified for present purposes as  white/non-white). see table 1.  6. socio-economic measures. socio-economic classification (sec) was based on  the online information provided by students taking ukcat, who completed  the abbreviated self-coded questionnaire (ns-sec) of uk national  statistics[43]. postcode based contextual measures of social  background were based on the 16 measures provided in the english  indices of deprivation[44] (see table 1).   ethics, anonymity and confidentiality. ethical permission for the study was provided  by ucl. the medical schools providing data for the analysis did so on the basis of  strict anonymity of the institutions themselves. we have also had no access to raw,  non-anonymised data, and have had to accept the data as provided as being correct  and accurate. data, were provided by the health informatics centre (hic) at the  university of dundee as anonymised, encrypted files, with a randomised  identification code for applicants in each year, which allowed merging of various  datasets.  data analysis was carried out by icm and cd. sn and jd did know the  identity of medical schools, but did not process the anonymised data.  


  9    statistical analyses.  conventional statistical analyses used ibm spss 20, with missing  values handled using the em method in missing values analysis.  multilevel  modelling used mlwin v 2.24.       results  the ukcat-12 study has one set of outcome measures (medical school performance  measures), two important sets of predictors (measures of prior educational  attainment and scores on the ukcat test), and a wide range of background  measures (demographic, secondary schooling, socio-economic and other measures).  these will be considered in turn, and in relation to each other.  medical school outcome measures. of 4,811 medical students on the four point  outcome scale (outcomefirstyear4pt), 4056 (84.3%) passed all their first year  examinations without resits, 565 (11.7%) progressed from the first year after resits,  94 (2.0%) were required to repeat the first year, and 96 (2.0%) left the medical  school (proportions which are very similar to the 81%, 14%, 1% and 4% reported in a  cohort of medical students entering in 1981[45].  altogether 109 students left  medical school, in 55 cases for academic reasons, and in 49 for non-academic  reasons (3 after repeating the first year, and 10 after passing the first year exams).  figure 1a shows that the distribution of overallmark is approximately normal, with  some leftward skew. distributions of theorymark and skillsmark in figures 1b and  1c are also approximately normally distributed, the correlation between them being  0.566 (figure 1d).    background variables and their relationship to educational attainment, ukcat score  and medical school outcome.  table 2 shows correlations of the twenty-two  background variables, as well as the six conventional measures of gce and sqa  achievement, with zeducationalattainment, zukcattotal score, and performance at  medical school. it should be remembered that many of the background variables are  themselves inter-correlated, and in the following analyses multivariate statistics are  used to tease apart the relationships. amongst this population of entrants to medical  school, who are not of course representative of applicants, the 22 background  variables together accounted for 3.9% of variance in educational attainment, and  14.0% of variance in ukcat total score, although that difference may in part reflect  selection on educational attainment and hence greater restriction of range. 


  10    prior educational attainment and its relation to medical school performance. overall  there was a highly significant correlation between prior educational attainment  (zeducationalattainment) and overallmark (r=.362, n=3432, p<.001), which was  significantly stronger (z=3.76, p<.001) for sqa qualifications (r=.464, n=715, p<.001,  95% ci .406 to .522) than for gce qualifications (r=.331, n=2717, p<.001, 95% ci .298  to .364), the relationships being shown in figure 2.  overallmark was not as strongly  correlated with the more conventional measures of three best a-levels (r=.185, n =  2717, p<.001) and five best scottish highers (r=.121, n=715, p=.001), primarily due to  restriction of range and ceiling effects, although both correlated strongly with  zeducationalattainment (a-levels: r=.690, n=3432, p<.001; highers; r=.328, n=715,  p<.001). students with lower attainment at a-level did though perform less well, the  regression model suggesting that students with bbb performed about 1.1 sds below  those with aaa, a substantial effect. as explained in the technical report[34] our  analysis looked in detail at various aspects of measures of educational achievement.  in particular we note that for gce examinations predicting overallmark: i) as-level  results provided an incremental prediction over a-levels; ii) gcses provided an  incremental prediction over a- and as-levels; iii) grade at general studies a-level  provided an incremental prediction over (other) a-levels; iv) grades on all four core- sciences provided an incremental prediction over summed a-level grades, further  exploration finding that a key predictor appears to be the minimum core science  grade attained, low values predicting poorer performance at medical school; v) there  was no evidence that grades at any of the four core sciences were particularly  predictive of medical school performance, with simple correlations of overallmark  with grades in biology, chemistry, maths and physics being .182, .143, .125 and .172  (all p<.001, n=2645, 2739, 18750 and 685).  for sqa examinations in relation to  overallmark: i) ‘highers plus’ scoring provides incremental prediction over  conventional highers scoring; ii) advanced highers provides incremental prediction  over highers/highersplus; iii) none of the core sciences showed specific incremental  prediction, either at highers or highersplus; iv) advanced highers grades at biology  and chemistry (but not maths and physics), provided incremental prediction; v) as  with a-levels, the minimum core science grade attained seems to have predictive  value. finally, because sqa qualifications had a higher predictive validity than gce  qualifications, we compared the predictive validity of the qualifications in scottish  medical schools (where entrants have either gce or sqa qualifications) and other  medical schools (where entrants have gce qualifications).  in scottish medical  schools, sqa results had higher correlations with outcome than did gce results for 


  11    students on the same course, whereas gce predicted outcome equivalently in  scottish and non-scottish schools. sqa results do have greater predictive power,  perhaps because of the inclusion of advanced highers results. however elsewhere  we show that despite the higher correlation with outcome, the construct validity of  sqa results is somewhat lower than that for gce results[35].  predictive value of background variables, after taking prior educational attainment  into account. prior educational attainment correlates with a wide range of  background variables (tr table 5). an important question though concerns the  extent to which background variables continue to predict outcome after educational  attainment has been taken into account. overallmark was regressed on the 22  background variables, with an alpha set at 0.001 to account for repeated testing.  four background measures were significant, in order of entry: ethnic2, non-white  students performing less well (beta=-.126, p<10-14); being a mature student,  students over the age of 21 performing better than non-mature students (beta=.057,  p<.001);  ukcatdayoftakingpctilerank, students who took ukcat late performing  less well (beta=-.089, p<10-7); and dfes.avepointentry, students from high-attaining  secondary schools performing less well (beta=-.085, p<10-7).  figure 3 explores  dfes.avepointentry in more detail. figures 3b and 3c show that average points per  exam entry are substantially lower in non-selective schools than selective schools.  the average points are divided into four groups (boundaries 205, 230 and 250), with  almost no selective secondary schools in the lowest group and almost no non- selective secondary schools in the highest group. effects upon overall score were  estimated with a regression model in which there were significant effects of three  best a-level grades (beta=.205, p<.001) and secondary school-level average points  (beta= -.085, p=.005), and an almost significant effect of selective secondary  schooling (beta= -.056, p=.059), the fitted regression lines being shown in figure 3a.  there was no evidence of interactions. actual mean scores are shown for candidates  whose secondary schools were in the four groups of average points, and it can be  seen, particularly for entrants with aaa grades in both non-selective and selective  secondary schools that overall scores at medical school are lower in those from  secondary schools with higher average points scores. from the regression lines it can  be estimated that one grade at a-level (the difference between aaa and aab) is  equivalent to 85 points on the average point score, so that an entrant with abb at a- level from a secondary school with an average score of  175 (at about the 1st  percentile of the non-selective schools) performs similarly at medical school to a 


  12    candidate with aaa at a-level from a secondary school with an average score of 265  (at the 99th percentile of the selective secondary schools).  the relationship of ukcat total scores to medical school performance and to  background variables.  the correlation between ukcat scores and overallmark was  0.148 (n=4811, p<0.001). because ukcat is often said to be particularly helpful in  selecting mature entrants (where educational qualifications are often out of date or  not applicable), we compared the predictive validity of ukcat in mature and non- mature students (figure 4). the correlation with overallmark was higher in mature  students (r=.252, n=690, p<.001), than in non-mature students (r=.137, n=4076,  p<.001). mature students had somewhat more variable raw ukcat scores (sd=237.7  compared with 200.0), but regression showed that that was not the cause of the  increased correlation with overallmark.  the incremental validity of ukcat after  taking educational attainment into account was assessed by regressing overallmark  firstly on zeducationalattainment, and then on zukcattotal. zukcattotal  significantly improved the prediction of overallmark (t=3.54, 3429 df, p<.001), but  the beta coefficient was only 0.057, whereas the beta coefficient for  zeducationalattainment after taking ukcat into account was 0.351.  in practice  many admissions tutors can only use three best alevels, and therefore we repeated  the exercise with alevel_totalbestn, when the beta for ukcat was .101 but for a- levels was .168.  the previous analysis of overallmark in relation to the background  variables, after taking educational achievement into account, had found four  background variables related to medical school performance. we repeated the  regression analysis after inclusion of ukcat as well as educational achievement. all  of the four variables significant previously were again significant, suggesting that  ukcat performance cannot eliminate the effects of ethnicity, secondary schooling,  day of taking ukcat, or being a mature student in first year medical school  performance. in addition, sex was also  a significant predictor of overallmark, males  performing less well, after taking ukcat and other measures into account (beta=- .056, p<.001).  theory and skills exams, and the subtests of ukcat. ukcat has four subtests, of  abstract reasoning, decision analysis, quantitative reasoning and verbal reasoning,  which may correlate differently with educational attainment and with medical school  performance, particularly perhaps between theory and skills measures. table 3  shows correlations between the four ukcat sub-scales, and it can be seen that they  are significantly, but only moderately, correlated, suggesting that they are indeed  measuring different cognitive processes. each sub-scale correlates with the total 


  13    ukcat score (but it is of course a part of it). the subscales all correlate to much the  same extent with educational attainment, except for verbal reasoning which has a  rather lower correlation. all four sub-scales correlate with overallmark at medical  school, although verbal reasoning correlates significantly more highly than the other  three sub-scales, a pattern which is clearer still for the marks from theory exams,  whereas all four sub-scales show low and similar correlations with skillsmark.  in the  technical report[34] we describe further analyses showing that of the subtests, it is  verbal reasoning which particularly contributes unique variance to predicting  medical school performance after educational achievement has been taken into  account, both overall and for theorymark, and also for skillsmark, when higher  verbal reasoning predicted a lower skillsmark. verbal ability may predict better  than other subtests due to verbal tests being less subject to practice and coaching  effects[26].  identifying students in the four outcome groups.  although medical school  performance is a continuous measure, students eventually end up in one of four  categories, outcomefirstyear4pt, with the lower categories having important  consequences for the students and their careers. we therefore compared the four  groups on ukcat scores and the measures of prior educational attainment. table 4  shows comparison between the groups using one-way analysis of variance. the  overall pattern is that the students who perform less well tend to score lower on the  various measures. an exception is that in several cases the group who had failed  showed scores that were higher than those who are repeating the first year, as for  instance on measures of prior educational attainment and on several of the ukcat  scores. that may be because the group of failures is not homogenous. numbers in  the fail group are relatively small, with 55 leaving for academic reasons and 49 for  non-academic reasons (although reasons for leaving medical school are often  complex and not readily classified[46]). a comparison is available in the technical  report[34].   differences between medical schools assessed using multilevel modelling.    medical schools differ[47], and it is possible that variables which predict outcome in  one medical school will predict better or worse in other medical schools. the twelve  medical schools in ukcat-12 allow such possibilities to be assessed. the analyses will  begin with a model of the importance of educational achievement, which will be  described in some detail, and then a number of other factors will be considered as  well. 


  14    prior educational achievement. a three-level model is fitted (see figure 5), with  individual students at the 1st level, who are nested within the 12 medical schools at  the second level, which in turn at the third level are nested within either scotland or  elsewhere. note that because zeducationalattainment is not available for mature  students, this analysis is restricted to non-mature students.  the outcome variable is  overallmark, which is standardised within medical schools and cohorts (and hence  overall effects typically have means close to zero). the main predictor is  zeducationalattainment. a dummy variable, at the student level, sqaorgce  indicates whether students took sqa or gce qualifications (and it has already been  suggested that sqa attainment predicts medical school outcome better than gce  attainment). overallmark can be predicted at level-1 by zeducationalattainment  and sqaorgce, and by their interaction. the slope of the regression of overallmark  on zeducationalattainment and sqaorgce, and their interaction can also show  variance between medical schools and between scottish and non-scottish medical  schools.  figure 5 shows the full fitted model, estimates being shown with their  standard errors in parentheses, so that estimates are significantly different from zero  with p<.05 on a two-tailed test if their value is at least twice their standard error  (and these are indicated in figure 5).   zeducationalattainment is a strong indicator  of overallmark, the interaction with  sqa qualifications is also significant, predicting   overallmark more strongly than do gce qualifications. no other terms are  significant, which in particular means a) that educational achievement has the same  predictive value in all twelve medical schools, irrespective of whether they are in  scotland or elsewhere, and b) the increased predictive effect of sqa qualifications is  the same in all medical schools, in scotland or elsewhere.  the important conclusion  is that although medical schools might have differed in the predictive value of  educational attainment, perhaps because of differences in teaching methods,  curriculum or whatever, there is no evidence that they do so.  sex, secondary schooling and ethnicity. the three-level model for  zeducationalattainment was fitted with the addition of sex, the contextual  secondary school attainment measure dfes.avepointentry, and ethnicity (white), as  well as the interactions of those measures with zeducationalattainment.  after  taking zeducationalattainment into account, male students underperformed  (estimate = -.0699, se .0309), non-white students underperformed (estimate = - .2504, se = .0357), and students from secondary schools with a higher  dfes.avepointentry, score (that is, higher-attaining secondary schools) performed  less well overall (estimate= -.1112, se=.0183). there was no evidence that any of the 


  15    measures interacted with educational attainment and particularly important for  interpreting these results is that there was no evidence, for any of the three  measures, of variance between the twelve medical schools. in other words, males,  for instance, underperformed to the same extent in all twelve medical schools,  which is important for understanding and interpreting such effects.  ukcat scores and age. multilevel modelling of the prediction of ukcattotal, as well  as the subscores, was broadly similar to that for educational attainment, except that  differences between medical schools in scotland and elsewhere were not  considered, so that the model had two levels. age of students (<21, 21+) was  included as a previous analysis suggested that ukcat predicted better in mature  students. the overall fitted model is shown in figure 6. ukcat significantly predicts  outcome (estimate = .1295, se .0174).  mature students also perform better than  non-mature students (.3315, se .0738), and there is a significant interaction between  maturity and ukcat, ukcat predicting more strongly in mature students (estimate =  .1208 se .0548). there was no evidence that ukcat, age, or the interaction of ukcat  and age behaved differently in their predictive ability at any of the 12 medical  schools.   ukcat and sex, secondary schooling and ethnicity.  as before, sex, the contextual  secondary school attainment measure dfes.avepointentry, and ethnicity (white)  were added into the model, as also were their interactions with ukcat. level-2  effects for each term were also considered, but none were significant, indicating that  the measures behaved similarly in all of the twelve medical schools. level 2 effects  were therefore removed from the model.  at level 1, and after taking ukcat into  account and with educational attainment, there was underperformance by male  students (-.0927 se .0379), non-white students (-.2888 se .0371), and those from  high achieving secondary schools (-.0493, se .0184). the only significant interaction  with ukcat was for male sex (-.0756 se .0321), ukcat having a stronger prediction  of outcome in female students than male students.     discussion  the primary focus of ukcat-12, the first large-scale, collaborative uk study involving  twelve medical schools, was to assess the predictive validity of the ukcat test of  aptitude for medical school. a key strength is the large sample size of nearly 5000  medical students which provides adequate statistical power for answering questions  that a single medical school or a single cohort could not, as well as providing answers 


  16    that are likely to generalise to other medical schools. in addition the collecting of a  wide range of other measures of educational attainment, socio-economic  background, and education contextual measures, as well as outcome data from 12  medical schools, means that a much wider range of issues could be addressed.   inevitably, ukcat-12 has some limitations. it was intentionally restricted for this  paper to first-year examination results, in part to make the analyses manageable,  and in part because the end of the first year is a time when it is particularly common  to leave medical school. although our outcome measures do not (as yet), have  measures of performance as doctors, there can at least be confidence that those  leaving the medical school will not make good doctors, for indeed they will not  become doctors at all. other analyses make clear that performance across different  years of undergraduate and postgraduate performance shows high stability,  resulting in what we have called the ‘academic backbone’ [48], with first year  medical school performance strongly predicting subsequent performance.  likewise  exam results before, during and after medical school are correlated, both at the  individual level[1,2], and at the medical school level[48,49]. it will of course be  important and of great interest in the future to extend the current studies into later  years, particularly in the clinical years and beyond, in order to assess empirically the  extent of prediction.  although we had separate measures of ‘theory’ and ‘skills’ exams, these  measures were not available for all students, and for ‘skills’ measures in particular, a  range of different types of assessment was included. in the future a particular  interest will be in clinical skills, which as yet it is too soon to measure in all of these  cohorts. nevertheless, we expect that abilities acquired during the early years of  medical training, including an understanding of basic medical sciences, will underpin  the understanding of clinical science, so that it is highly likely that those  underperforming in their first year will on aggregate also underperform on measures  of clinical ability.   ukcat-12 only included twelve medical schools, but there is reason to believe  they are broadly representative of uk medical schools, with the possible exception  that a small group of the most selectively intense and academic of medical schools,  particularly including oxford and cambridge, choose instead to use bmat. since  many medical school candidates necessarily end up taking both ukcat and bmat, a  collaborative research exercise involving both aptitude tests might usefully  illuminate the extent of similarities and differences between them. on the basis of  the very limited published evidence for the validity of bmat[21,23,50], which was in 


  17    a single medical school, it seems probable that its predictive validity is of a similar  order of magnitude to ukcat. likewise it is probable that the results generalise to  other selection tests which are primarily of intellectual aptitude.   there are many important and useful findings from the uckat-12 study, and  here we will briefly overview some of them, starting with more general conclusions  about selection and performance overall, and then considering ukcat in particular.  prior educational attainment.  academic qualifications, typically a-levels and scottish  highers, have long been the mainstay of medical student selection, the course being  academically very demanding, and an ability to cope both with the cognitive load  and the science content being seen as important. ukcat-12 confirms the importance  of prior educational attainment, performance on the course correlating with  educational attainment. the role of a-levels and highers has been questioned, in  large part because there is little variation in educational attainment in students  actually on the course. however ukcat-12’s large samples make clear that even  small amounts of under-attainment (aab, abb or bbb compared with aaa at a-level)  correlate with poorer performance in the first year of medical school. there is  therefore clear evidence justifying not only the continued use of school achievement  for selection but also supporting the development of validated approaches utilising  more of the available information (such as gcse, as-level and additional details such  as ‘highers plus’ and advanced highers).  a key question for selection concerns  widening access and two aspects merit consideration here.  firstly, the analysis of  construct validity, described in detail in a separate paper [35], allows the calculation  of how well those with lower qualifications are likely to perform if admitted.   secondly, we can now make justifiable estimates of how contextual measures, such  as personal and educational background might be ‘factored in’, in such a way that  they optimise the potential of medical school entrants best.  secondary school achievement. the ukcat-12 identified a number of aspects of  educational achievement of practical importance.   1. although most medical schools require a qualification in chemistry, there are  few data asking whether chemistry is a good predictor of outcome, or  whether other academic subjects are particularly important. uckat-12 found  that no particular core science seemed at a-level or highers to be especially  predictive of outcome. instead the lowest grade attained in a core science did  seem to predict outcome.  


  18    2. grade at a-level general studies showed an independent predictive value,  after other a-levels were taken into account.   3. as-level grades added additional predictive value after taking a-levels into  account.   4. gcse grades added further incremental validity on top of as- and a-levels.  this differs from the recent government claim that gcses have equal  prediction of degree class as a-levels [51], perhaps because the non-linear  relationship is steeper at high attainment levels.  5. there was no evidence that students with ‘double science’ at gcse  underperformed [34].  6. scottish highers did not predict, mainly due to ceiling effects, although using  the full range of marks in scottish highers (our ‘highers plus’ scores) provided  better prediction, and scottish advanced highers produced further  prediction.  7. overall sqa qualifications predicted performance better overall than gce  qualifications (although they appear to have lower construct validity[35].  educational attainment is clearly a strong predictor of outcome, but it is currently  limited by so many applicants getting top grades (a problem which might be partly  mitigated by a* grades at a-level, although at present government policy is in the  future to decouple as- and a-level assessments). a partial solution is to consider also  as-levels and gcse results, both of which have incremental value over a-levels (and  a wider range of performance). as-levels and gcses also have the practical  advantage of being available at the time of selection, rather than merely being  estimated grades for exams yet to be taken.  scottish highers particularly have the  problem of many candidates being at ceiling, but using the full range of marks  available at highers (a1, a2, etc), as well as using advanced highers can result in  much better prediction.   our constructed measure of prior educational achievement demonstrates that more  can be achieved by the detailed assessment of secondary school based performance  measures.  though care would need to be taken to assess impact on widening access  and this measure cannot be applied to graduate applicants.  in summary, even with the limitations of currently available measures of educational  attainment, the results of this study suggest that it would be possible to obtain  better prediction of medical school performance by drawing upon information  currently neglected in selection: namely as-level, gcse, and the full range of marks 


  19    provided by scottish highers, with the introduction of a* grades at a-level also  perhaps being of help.  the replicability of these findings, and the reasons for them, can be left for future  studies, but all show the potential importance of large-scale studies of selection both  for forcing theoretical interpretation on the nature of medical education, and for  providing a clear evidence-base for answering important practical questions about  selection.  ethnicity, sex and age as predictors of medical school performance. the ukcat-12  data shows that older students, female students, and white students all perform  better at medical school, with all effects being significant after taking educational  attainment and ukcat scores into account. the ethnic difference found is similar to  that found in a meta-analysis[52]. the ukcat-12 study particularly adds to previous  studies because the multilevel modelling shows that the effects of maturity, sex and  ethnicity are equivalent at all twelve medical schools, making it unlikely that the  differentials found in performance are the result of institutionally-specific effects.    secondary schooling and socio-economic factors at the individual and the contextual  level. students educated at selective schools performed less well at medical school  than those educated in non-selective schools. contextual measures were also  available for secondary schools in england, and students also performed less well  who came from secondary schools with a higher value-added score at key stage 5, or  at which students gained more points at a-level (with two different ways of  calculating those points). multiple regression showed that the effect was not due to  selective secondary schooling as such, but principally related to the average a-level  attainment level of pupils at a secondary school, with the apparently paradoxical  finding that the higher the achievement of pupils overall, the less well pupils from  that secondary school did at medical school. the result is not novel, and a similar  finding had previously been reported by hesa[3,53]. the mechanism of the finding is  not completely clear, but one possibility is that higher achieving secondary schools  achieve their results in part by contributing extra ‘polish’ to a student’s work, polish  which no longer generalises or transfers when they then move to a university where  such support is not present. alternatively it may be that academic aspirations are  higher in those from less academic environments, due to the ‘big fish little pond  effect’[54]. that the effect found by hesa is now found in medical students suggests  that there is a strong argument for using the contextual measure of average a-level  attainment at a secondary school in making admission decisions.  


  20    ukcat-12 also considered a range of other socio-economic measures, both directly  of the socio-economic classification of a student themself, based on self-description  of parental occupation using the self-completion scale of the office for national  statistics[43], and indirectly, as contextual measures of deprivation on a range of  scales, from the english deprivation indices[44]. the findings are straightforward; as  has been reported before[45], socio-economic background seems to bear little or no  relationship to medical school performance once educational attainment is taken  into account. both in the uk[55], and the us[56], for university admissions in  general, evidence suggests that the barrier for college entry is lower application  rates, rather than universities discriminating against those from lower ses  backgrounds.  the implication is that socio-economic contextual factors may not be  of utility in selection, although they could well be of use in encouraging higher rates  of application from disadvantaged groups.  predictive validity of ukcat. performance at ukcat does correlate with first-year  performance at medical school.  the correlation is small but significant for secondary  school leavers and is larger for mature entrants.  the incremental validity of ukcat  after taking the current educational attainment used for selection into account is  small but significant and as such provides sufficient added value for ukcat to be an  adjunct to current selection processes. however the data analysis also demonstrates  the potential of the improved predictive validity of using fuller information on  educational attainment. measures of educational attainment probably predict  university outcome better because they provide evidence simultaneously in three  domains: intellectual ability (typically fluid intelligence), substantive subject  knowledge about science (crystallised intelligence), and a combination of motivation,  appropriate study skills, and personality[57]. ukcat aims to assess fluid intelligence  and other attributes thought to be important in decision making, but it specifically  attempts not to measure science knowledge.  the most likely explanation of the  relatively lower predictive validity of the ukcat aptitude tests is that they do not  assess domain knowledge (and hence indirectly personality, motivation, etc.),  although personality and motivation are included in more recent versions of ukcat,  not included here.    ukcat predicts outcome significantly better in mature than non-mature  students. mature students often have unusual combinations of academic  qualifications, sometimes taken a while ago, and ukcat is potentially a useful tool  for assessing such applicants. ukcat also predicts differently in males and females, 


  21    the predictive validity being less in males than females, reflecting in part the fact that  males do less well at medical school but do somewhat better overall on ukcat.  improvements to ukcat. options for improving the predictive validity of the  cognitive tests in ukcat are several-fold. reliability of ukcat could be somewhat  improved by increasing the test length, although the relatively low construct validity,  described elsewhere[35], suggests that the benefit would not be large. this would  also incur increased costs and additional candidate inconvenience. the ukcat verbal  reasoning sub-test has the highest correlations with outcome and review of content  and style of this sub-test is underway, but without making the test unbalanced. , and  there is little theoretical sense in, say, downgrading quantitative abilities for a  technical, science-based course. other cognitive subtests might be added, but the  ubiquity of ‘g’ probably means that there are no obvious domains of general mental  ability which are not currently covered. the performance of section 2 of bmat[23]  and the science knowledge tests of mcat[32] suggest that tests which include  substantive science knowledge have higher predictive validity than ‘pure’ aptitude  tests, which essentially measure only fluid intelligence, and do not assess acquired  knowledge or the motivation and personality necessary to acquire it. however,  ukcat originally set out specifically not to include such measures[20] as they are  currently available through traditional measures of educational attainment. non- cognitive measures, primarily of aspects of personality have been piloted by ukcat,  and might contribute additional variance[29].  ukcat is also currently piloting a  situational judgement test, which might also assess separate constructs from those  presently assessed.  operational utility of ukcat. the emergence of aptitude testing for medical  selection resulted from weaknesses in the existing information available to selectors  and these persist.  differentiating in a transparent and fair way between the many  applicants who apply for each place in a medical school is challenging and the  predictive validity and small incremental validity provide some justification for use of  ukcat.  certainly ukcat, which is now an integral component of many medical  school’s systems, seems in many ways more justifiable than the use of ucas  personal statements, which have been less well studied, are open to criticism for  difficulty in scoring consistently, and are subject to a range of influences including  social opportunity, and have not been shown to predict success in medical school  [17,58,59].  there is also evidence that utilising ukcat has a positive impact on  widening access[19].  with on-going refinements and in particular the introduction 


  22    of non-cognitive tools such as situational judgement tests the existing assessment  may be able to improve further.  conclusions. the primary impetus for the ukcat-12 study was to evaluate ukcat in  the context of medical student selection. the data analysis confirms that ukcat  scores have operational utility when used alongside measures of educational  attainment.  the ukcat-12 study, we believe, particularly indicates the value of ‘big  data’ in evaluating medical education and lessons learned in the uk are probably  generalizable elsewhere. a noteworthy feature is the use not only of data collected  on students themselves but also integration of other large-scale databases, such as  the department for education data on secondary school performance in england,  and the english deprivation indices.  for the first time it is possible to consider the  construct validity of selection tools for medicine in the uk and these, using the  uckat-12 study, as well as five other cohort studies, are published separately[35].  two future developments would be particularly welcome.   though considerable  data is now being amassed it does not cover all worthwhile outcomes, or even all  ukcat medical schools let alone uk medical schools.  extending studies such as this  to include more medical schools with follow-up into later undergraduate years, as  well as post-graduate (as has been carried out for other cohort studies[48]), is vital.    in addition, as cohorts of students graduate and go into practise, so other databases  will become available for addressing questions of predictive validity both for  postgraduate assessments and also outcome measures in clinical practice itself, thus  enabling a range of large-scale longitudinal studies.   such databases, studies and  analyses would enable much faster progress towards the target of the royal  commission on medical education, the todd report of 1968, which it called, “an  objective evaluation of student selection”[60].   conclusions    this collaborative study shows the power of large-scale, multi-medical school,  studies of medical education for answering previously unanswerable but important  questions about medical student selection, education and training. ukcat has  predictive validity as a predictor of medical school outcome, particularly in mature  applicants to medical school. ukcat offers small but significant incremental validity  which is valuable at an operational level where medical schools are currently making  selection decisions based on incomplete measures of educational attainment. this  study confirms the validity of using all the existing measures of educational  attainment in full at the time of selection decision-making. contextual measures  provide little additional predictive value, with the exception of overall level of 


  23    secondary school attainment, students from high attaining secondary schools  performing less well than those from less well attaining secondary schools, as hesa  has previously shown for universities in general.      abbreviations  a-level: advanced level  as-level: advanced subsidiary level  bmat: biomedical admissions test  em: expectation maximisation algorithm  hesa: higher education statistics agency  gce: general certificate of education  gcse: general certificate of secondary education  mlwin: multi-level modelling for windows  ns-sec: national statistics socio-economic classification  sec: socio-economic classification  sqa: scottish qualifications authority  ucas: universities and colleges admissions service  ukcat: united kingdom clinical aptitude test    competing interests  professor mcmanus’ university has received grants from the ukcat board during the  conduct of the study, and he has on occasion provided advice to ukcat; dr.  dewberry has received personal fees from ukcat board during the conduct of the  study; dr. nicholson is chair of the ukcat board, has sat on the ukcat research  working group during the time of this study, and has not received any personal  financial reward or assistance with this study; dr. dowell reports that the university  of dundee is funded by ukcat to manage and host one of the databases on which  the part of this study was  based, he has acted as a board member of the ukcat  consortium since 2008 and as lead of the ukcat research panel since 2009.    authors’ contributions.   icm and cd were commissioned by the ukcat consortium to analyse the ukcat-12  data, and their institutions received a small amount of funding to support the work.   the design of the study was a collaboration between all of the authors. icm and cd  carried out the main data analyses, and results were discussed between all  participants in the production of the technical report. icm wrote the first draft of  the manuscript, and all authors reviewed the final manuscript and contributed to it. .   


  24    acknowledgements  we are very grateful to all those working on the ukcat project for their help at all  stages of this project, in particular rachel greatrix, david ridley and john kernthaler,  who have provided much assistance, and to the twelve medical schools for providing  performance data.  this paper is presented on behalf of the ukcat board and with  their collaboration.  funding.  the analysis of the ukcat-12 data was supported by a small amount of  funding from the ukcat board  to the institutions which employ icm and cd.        


  25      references     1.  mcmanus ic, richards p, winder bc, sproston ka: clinical experience, performance in final  examinations, and learning style in medical students: prospective study. brit med j 1998,  316: 345-350.   2.  mcmanus ic, smithers e, partridge p, keeling a, fleming pr: a levels and intelligence as  predictors of medical careers in uk doctors: 20 year prospective study. brit med j 2003,  327: 139-142.   3.  bekhradnia b, thompson j: who does best at university? london: higher education funding  council england.   www.hefce.ac.uk/learning/whodoes; 2002.   4.  trapmann s, hell b, weigand s, schuler h: die validität von schulnoten zur vorhersage des  studienerfolgs -- eine metaanalyse. zeitschrift für pädagogische psychologie 2007, 21: 11- 27.   5.  cohen-schotanus j, muijtjens amm, reinders jj, agsteribbe j, van rossum hjm, van der  vleuten cpm: the predictive validity of grade point average scores in a partial lottery  medical school admission system. med educ 2006, 40: 1012-1019.   6.  iramaneerat c: predicting academic achievement in the medical school with high school  grades. journal of the medical association of thailand 2006, 89: 1497-1505.   7.  coates h: establishing the criterion validity of the graduate medical school admissions  test (gamsat). med educ 2008, 42: 999-1006.   8.  contreras r, ubilla s, ugalde h, vicentini e: comparative-study of the academic aptitude- test and final grading in chilean medical-schools. revista medica de chile 1984, 112: 1033- 1043.   9.  kadmon g, kirchner a, duelli r, resch f, kadmon m: what is the purpose of the german  aptitude test for medical studies (tms)? [warum der test fur medizinische studiengange  (tms)?]. zeitschrift für evidenz, fortbildung und qualität im gesundheitswesen 2012, 106:  125-130.   10.  trost g: the aptitude-test for medical-students has proved its worth. münchener  medizinische wochenschrift 1982, 124: 885-886.   11.  khan js, tabasum s, mukhtar o: comparison of pre-medical academic achievement,  entrance test and aptitude test scores in admission selection process. journal of the  pakistan medical association 2013, 63: 552-557.   12.  lia c, cavaggioni g: the selection process in the faculty of medicine: the usefulness of a  psychological and aptitude assessment. clinica terapeutica 2013, 164: 39-42.   13.  garcia-mangas ja, viniegra-velasquez l, arellano-lopez j, garcia-moreno j: evaluation of  the clinical aptitude in physicians of the first level of attention. [evaluacion de la aptitud  clinica en medicos de primer nivel de atencion]. revista medica del instituto mexicano del  seguro social 2005, 43: 465-472.   14.  mcgregor a: aptitude-tests for entry to swiss medical faculties. lancet 1994, 344: 1424.   15.  collin vt, violato c, hecker k: aptitude, achievement and competence in medicine: a latent  variable path model. advances in health sciences education 2009, 14: 355-366. 


  26     16.  zeleznik c, hojat m, veloski j: long-range predictive and differential validities of the  scholastic aptitude-test in medical-school. epm 1983, 43: 223-232.   17.  wright sr, bradley pm: has the uk clinical aptitude test improved medical student  selection? med educ 2010, 44: 1069-1076.   18.  yates j, james d: the uk clinical aptitude test and clinical course performance at  nottingham: a prospective cohort study. bmc medical education 2013, 13.   19.  tiffin pa, dowell js, mclachlan jc: widening access to uk medical education for under- represented socioeconomic groups: modelling the impact of the ukcat in the 2009 cohort.  brit med j 2012, 344.   20.  ukcat: ukcat: 2006 annual report. cambridge: united kingdom clinical aptitude test  (available at http://www.ukcat.ac.uk/pdf/ukcat annual report 2006 v2.pdf); 2008.   21.  emery jl, bell jf: the predictive validity of the biomedical admissions test for pre-clinical  examination performance. med educ 2009, 43: 557-564.   22.  hunter je, schmidt fl, le h: implications of direct and indirect range restriction for meta- analysis methods and findings. j app psych 2006, 91: 594-612.   23.  mcmanus ic, ferguson e, wakeford r, powis d, james d: predictive validity of the  biomedical admissions test (bmat): an evaluation and case study. med teach 2011, 33:  53-57.   24.  cassidy j: ukcat among the pigeons. brit med j 2008, 336: 691-692.   25.  cleland ja, french fh, johnson pw: a mixed-methods study identifying and exploring  medical students' views of the ukcat. med teach 2011, 3: 249.   26.  hausknecht jp, halpert ja, di paolo nt, gerrard mom: retesting in selection: a meta- analysis of coaching and practice effects for tests of cognitive ability. j app psych 2007,  92: 373-385.   27.  credé m, kuncel nr: study habits, skills, and attitudes: the third pillar supporting collegiate  academic performance. perspectives on psychological science 2008, 3: 425-453.   28.  yates j, james d: the value of the uk clinical aptitude test in predicting pre-clinical  performance: a prospective cohort study at nottingham medical school. bmc medical  education 2010, 10: 55-www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/10/55.   29.  adam j, bore m, mckendree j, munro d, powis d: can personal qualities of medical  students predict in-course examination success and professional behaviour? an  exploratory prospective study. bmc medical education 2012, 12:  http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/12/69/abstract-doi:10.1186/1472-6920-12-69.   30.  lynch b, mackenzie r, dowell j, cleland j, prescott g: does the ukcat predict year 1  performance in medical school? med educ 2009, 43: 1203-1209.   31.  turner r, nicholson s: can the uk clinical aptitude test (ukcat) select suitable candidates  for interview?  med educ 2011, 45: 1041-1047.   32.  donnon t, paolucci eo, violato c: the predictive validity of the mcat for medical school  performance medical board licensing examinations: a meta-analysis of the published  research. acad med 2007, 82: 100-106. 


  27     33.  adam j, dowell j, greatrix r: use of ukcat scores in student selection by uk medical  schools, 2006-2010. bmc medical education 2011, 11:98   http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/11/98: doi:10.1186/1472-6920-11-98.   34.  mcmanus ic, dewberry c, nicholson s, dowell j: the ukcat-12 study: technical report.  nottingham: ukcat consortium; 2012.   35.  mcmanus ic, dewberry c, nicholson s, dowell js, woolf k, potts hww: construct validity of  educational attainment and intellectual aptitude tests in medical student selection: meta- regression of six uk longitudinal studies. submitted 2013.   36.  emery jl, bell jf, emer, rodeiro clv: the biomedical admissions test for medical student  selection: issues of fairness and bias. med teach 2011, 33: 62-71.   37.  johnson j, hayward g: expert group report for award seeking admission to the ucas tariff:  scottish highers and advanced highers. cheltenham: ucas; 2008.   38.  ukcat: ukcat: 2007 annual report. cambridge: united kngdom clinical aptitude test  (available at http://www.ukcat.ac.uk/pdf/ukcat annual report 2007.pdf); 2008.   39.  ukcat: ukcat 2008 annual report. nottingham: ukcat; 2008.   40.  pearson vue: technical report: testing interval: july 11 2006 - october 14,2006 (january  2007, revised may 3, 2007). chicago: pearson vue; 2007.   41.  pearson vue: technical report regarding the uk clinical aptitude test examination for the  ukcat consortium; testing interval: 18 june 2007 - 10 october 2007; january 2008. chicago:  pearson vue; 2008.   42.  pearson vue: technical reports; uk clinical aptitude test consortium; ukcat examination;  teseting interval: 7 july 2008 - 12 october 2008. chicago: pearson vue; 2009.   43.  office for national statistics: the national statistics socio-economic classification: user  manual (www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/classifications/archived-standard- classifications/soc-and-sec-archive/the-national-statistics-socio-economic-classification-- user-manual.pdf). newport: national statistics; 2005.   44.  mclennan d, barnes h, noble m, davies j, garratt e, dibben c: the english indices of  deprivation 2010. london: department for communities and local government; 2011.   45.  mcmanus ic, richards p: prospective survey of performance of medical students during  preclinical years. brit med j 1986, 293: 124-127.   46.  yates j: when did they leave, and why? a retrospective case study of attrition on the  nottingham undergraduate medical course. bmc medical education 2012, 12: 43.   47.  mcmanus ic: medical school differences: beneficial diversity or harmful deviations? quality  and safety in health care 2003, 12: 324-325.   48.  mcmanus ic, woolf k, dacre j, paice e, dewberry c: the academic backbone: longitudinal  continuities in educational achievement from secondary school and medical school to  mrcp(uk) and the specialist register in uk medical students and doctors. submitted 2013.   49.  mcmanus ic, elder at, de champlain a, dacre je, mollon j, chis l: graduates of different uk  medical schools show substantial differences in performance on mrcp(uk) part 1, part 2  and paces examinations. bmc medicine 2008, 6:5: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741- 7015/6/5. 


  28     50.  partington r: the predictive effectiveness of metrics in admission to the university of  cambridge. cambridge: university of cambridge:  http://www.cam.ac.uk/admissions/undergraduate/research/docs/prefective_effectiveness_ of_metrics_in_admission.pdf; 2011.   51.  department for education: a comparison of gcse results and as level results as a predictor of  getting a 2:1 or above at university. london: department for education  (www.gov.uk/government/publications/a-comparison-of-gcse-results-and-as-level-results- as-a-predictor-of-getting-a-21-or-above-at-university); 2013.   52.  woolf k, potts hww, mcmanus ic: the relationship between ethnicity and academic  performance in uk-trained doctors and medical students: a systematic review and meta- analysis. brit med j 2011, 342: d901-doi: 10.1136/bmj.d901.   53.  anonymous.: schooling effects on higher education achievement.  http://www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/hefce/2003/03_32.htm: 2003.   54.  nagengast b, marsh hw: big fish in little ponds aspire more: mediation and cross-cultural  generalizability of school-average ability effects on self-concept and career aspirations in  science. journal of educational psychology 2012, 104: 1033-1053.   55.  anders j: the link between household income, university applications and university  attendance. fiscal studies 2012, 33: 185-210.   56.  sackett pr, kuncel nr, beatty as, rigdon jl, shen w, kiger tb: the role of socioeconomic  status in sat-grade relationships and in college admissions decisions. psychological science  2012, 23: 1000-1007.   57.  mcmanus ic, powis da, wakeford r, ferguson e, james d, richards p: intellectual aptitude  tests and a levels for selecting uk school leaver entrants for medical school. brit med j  2005, 331: 555-559.   58.  ferguson e, james d, madeley l: factors associated with success in medical school and in a  medical career: systematic review of the literature. brit med j 2002, 324: 952-957.   59.  siu e, reiter h: overview: what's worked and what hasn't as a guide towards predictive  admissions tool development. advances in health sciences education 2009, 14: 775.   60.  royal commission: royal commission on medical education (the todd report), cmnd 3569.  london: hmso; 1968.     


  1    ta bl e  1:  s um m ar y  of  v ar ia bl es  in  th e  an al ys is.  v ar ia bl es  a re  in di ca te d  by  t he ir  s ps s  va ri ab le  n am es  (i n  bo ld ) t o  re du ce  a m bi gu it y.      ca te go ry   v ar ia bl es  u se d  in  t he  a na ly si s  n ot es  a nd  c om m en ts   m ed ic al   sc ho ol   ou tc om e  da ta   o ut co m ef irs ty ea r4 pt   o ve ra llm ar k  th eo ry m ar k  sk ill sm ar k  m ed ic al  s ch oo ls  d at a  on  s tu de nt  p er fo rm an ce  i n  th ei r  fir st  a ca de m ic  y ea r  fo r  th e  th re e  co ho rt s.  n ot  a ll  sc ho ol s  pr ov id ed  d at a  fo r  al l c oh or ts , 1 1,  1 1  an d  9  sc ho ol s  pr ov id in g  da ta  f or   th e  20 07 -9  c oh or ts , f or  1 66 1,  1 71 0  an d  14 40  s tu de nt s.  in  t he  s am e  co ho rt s,  u kc a t  w as  u se d  fo r  se le ct io n  by  2 3,  2 5  an d  26  m ed ic al  s ch oo ls .   t he  o ve ra ll  nu m be r  of  s tu de nt s  fr om  t he   tw el ve  s ch oo ls  v ar ie d  fr om  8 7  to  9 45  ( m ed ia n  =  33 5,  m ea n= 40 1,  s d =2 43 ).    m ed ic al  s ch oo ls   w er e  as ke d  to  p ro vi de  s ev er al  it em s  of  in fo rm at io n  on  e ac h  st ud en t  , a lt ho ug h  no t  al l s ch oo ls   pr ov id ed  a ll  in fo rm at io n.  d at a  w er e  co lle ct ed  b y  th e  u kc a t  co ns or ti um  o ff ic e,  a nd  n ot  b y  th e  re se ar ch er s.   m ea su re s  us ed  w er e  as  fo llo w s:   o ut co m ef irs ty ea r4 pt  :  o ut co m e  of  t he  f ir st  y ea r  on  a  f ou r- po in t  sc al e  (p as se d  al l  ex am s  at   fir st  a tt em pt ;  pa ss ed  a ft er  r es it ti ng  e xa m s;  r ep ea ti ng  t he  f ir st  y ea r;  a nd  le av in g  th e  co ur se );    o ve ra llm ar k,  t he or ym ar k,  a nd  s ki lls m ar k:    a ve ra ge d  pe rc en ta ge  m ar ks  i n  m ed ic al  s ch oo l  as se ss m en ts .  o ve ra llm ar k,  b as ed  o n  al l  as se ss m en ts ,  w as  a va ila bl e  fo r  4, 51 0  st ud en ts ,  on e  sc ho ol  p ro vi di ng  o nl y  o ut co m ef irs ty ea r4 pt ,  an d  oc ca si on al  s tu de nt s  el se w he re  n ot  h av in g  pe rc en ta ge  m ar ks ; i n  ea ch  c as e  a  pr ox y  o ve ra llm ar k  w as  c al cu la te d  as  a  n or m al  s co re , u si ng   sp ss ’s  r an k  ca se s/ n or m al  s co re s  co m m an d.   s ep ar at e  m ar ks  w er e  al so  a va ila bl e  fo r  ‘t he or y'   an d  's ki lls '  as se ss m en ts ,  th e  de fin it io n  of  t he or y  an d  sk ill s  be in g  le ft  t o  m ed ic al  s ch oo ls .  th eo ry m ar k  an d  sk ill sm ar k  w er e  av ai la bl e  fo r  2, 07 5  an d  3, 18 4  st ud en ts .    b ec au se   pe rc en ta ge  m ar ks  a re  n ot  n ec es sa ri ly  c om pa ra bl e  ac ro ss  s ch oo ls ,  o ve ra llm ar k,  t he or ym ar k  an d  sk ill sm ar k  w er e  st an da rd iz ed  t o  a  m ea n  of  z er o  an d  sd  o f  on e  w it hi n  m ed ic al  s ch oo ls   an d  co ho rt s.   pr io r  ed uc at io na l  a ch ie ve m en t  al ev el _n um be r_ to ta l  al ev el _t ot al be st     al ev el _t ot al po in ts    al ev el s_ ta ke n_ 1_ or _m or e_ bi ol og y  al ev el s_ ta ke n_ 1_ or _m or e_ ch em is tr y  al ev el s_ ta ke n_ 1_ or _m or e_ ph ys ic s  al ev el s_ ta ke n_ 1_ or _m or e_ m at hs   al ev el s_ hi gh es t_ bi ol og y  al ev el s_ hi gh es t_ ch em is tr y  al ev el s_ hi gh es t_ ph ys ic s  al ev el s_ hi gh es t_ m at hs   al ev el s_ ta ke n_ 1_ or _m or e_ n on sc ie nc e  al ev el s_ ta ke n_ 1_ or _m or e_ g en er al st ud ie s  w e  w ill  d es cr ib e  th e  an al ys is  o f  a -le ve ls  i n  so m e  de ta il.  o th er  e xa m in at io ns  s ho w  m in or   va ri at io ns  fr om  t he  a na ly si s  of  a -le ve ls  w hi ch  w e  w ill  t he n  de sc ri be .   a  (a dv an ce d)  le ve ls.  s co re d  as  a =1 0,  b =8 ,  c= 6,  d =4 ,  e= 2,  e ls e= 0.    a *  gr ad es  a t  a  l ev el  w er e  no t  aw ar de d  du ri ng  t he  s tu dy  p er io d.  m ea su re s  w er e  on ly  c al cu la te d  fo r  st ud en ts  w it h  th re e  or  m or e  a -le ve ls ,  ot he rs  b ei ng  s et  a s  m is si ng .  fo ur te en  m ea su re s  se pa ra te  m ea su re s  w er e  ob ta in ed ,  de sc ri be d  fu rt he r  in  t he  t ec hn ic al  r ep or t[ 34 ].  g en er al  s tu di es  w as  n ot  c ou nt ed  in   th e  ov er al l  to ta ls ,  m ea ns ,  et c,  b ut  w as  a na ly se d  se pa ra te ly ,  as  i ts  s ta tu s  is  u nc le ar .  th e  m ea su re s  (w it h  th ei r  na m es  i n  bo ld ),  w er e:  a le ve l_ nu m be r_ to ta l:  n um be r  of  n on -g en er al   st ud ie s  a -le ve ls ,  of  t he  2 76 4  en tr an ts ,  41 .8 %  h ad  4  o r  m or e;  a le ve l_ to ta lb es t:   s um  o f  th e  th re e  hi gh es t  a -le ve l g ra de s,  w hi ch  w as  7 3. 0%  o f  st ud en ts  w as  t he  m ax im um  s co re  o f  30  ( i.e .  a a a ),  w it h  21 .3 %  s co ri ng  2 8  (a a b) ,  5. 0%  s co ri ng  2 6  (a b b/ a a c) ,  0. 6%  s co ri ng  2 4  (b b b  or   eq uv iv al en t) , a nd  fo ur  c an di da te s  sc or in g  20 , 1 6,  1 6,  a nd  1 0.  a le ve l_ to ta lp oi nt s:   t ot al  p oi nt s  ac hi ev ed  b y  a  st ud en t  fo r  al l o f a -le ve ls , w hi ch  fo r  th os e  ta ki ng  3  a -le ve ls  w as  t he  s am e  as  t he  


  2    ca te go ry   v ar ia bl es  u se d  in  t he  a na ly si s  n ot es  a nd  c om m en ts   al ev el s_ hi gh es t_ g en er al st ud ie s   in  a dd it io n  eq ui va le nt  v ar ia bl es  f or  o th er   qu al ifi ca ti on s  ar e  na m ed  in  s im ila r  w ay s  bu t  w it h  al ev el …  r ep la ce d  by  a sl ev el … , g cs e… ,  sq ah ig he r… ,  sq ah ig he rp lu s…     an d  sq aa dv hi gh er pl us …  .   ed uc at io na la tt ai nm en tg ce   ed uc at io na la tt ai nm en ts q a  ed uc at io na la tt ai nm en t  ze du ca tio na la tt ai nm en tg ce   ze du ca tio na la tt ai nm en ts q a  sq ao rg ce     pr ev io us   m ea su re ;    al ev el s_ ta ke n_ 1_ or _m or e_ bi ol og y,   al ev el s_ ta ke n_ 1_ or _m or e_ ch em is tr y,     al ev el s_ ta ke n_ 1_ or _m or e_ ph ys ic s,   an d  al ev el s_ ta ke n_ 1_ or _m or e_ m at hs ):  a  s er ie s  of  ‘ du m m y  va ri ab le s’ ,  sc or ed  a s  1  if  th e  su bj ec t  ha d  be en  t ak en  a nd  0  if  it  h ad  n ot .   95 .7 % , 9 9. 1% , 2 4. 8%  a nd  6 3. 3%  o f  a  le ve l s tu de nt s  ha d  a   le ve ls   in   bi ol og y,   ch em is tr y,   ph ys ic s  an d  m at hs .  al ev el s_ hi gh es t_ bi ol og y,   al ev el s_ hi gh es t_ ch em is tr y,  a le ve ls _h ig he st _p hy si cs ,  an d  al ev el s_ hi gh es t_ m at hs :   h ig he st   gr ad e  at ta in ed  b y  a  st ud en t  on  b io lo gy ,  ch em is tr y,  p hy si cs  a nd  m at hs  s ub je ct s;  e xc ep t  fo r  m at hs ,  st ud en ts   m os tl y  ha d  ta ke n  on ly   on e  ex am   in   ea ch   ca te go ry ;  al ev el s_ ta ke n_ 1_ or _m or e_ n on sc ie nc e  w as  a  1 /0  d um m y  va ri ab le  in di ca ti ng  t ha t  a  st ud en t  ha d  a -le ve l(s )  ot he r  th an  i n  th e  co re  s ci en ce s  of  b io lo gy ,  ch em is tr y,  p hy si cs  o r  m at hs  ( or   g en er al   st ud ie s) .  49 .9 %   of   st ud en ts   ha d  at   le as t  on e  no n- sc ie nc e    a -le ve l;  al ev el s_ ta ke n_ 1_ or _m or e_ g en er al st ud ie s:  a  1 /0  d um m y  va ri ab le  i nd ic at in g  w he th er  a   st ud en t  ha d  ta ke n  g en er al   st ud ie s  a -le ve l;  26 .0 %   ha d  do ne   so ;  al ev el s_ hi gh es t_ ge ne ra ls tu di es :  fo r  st ud en ts  t ak in g  g en er al  s tu di es ,  th e  hi gh es t  gr ad e  at ta in ed , 4 6. 9%  h av in g  an  a  g ra de ;     as  (a dv an ce d  su bs id ia ry ) l ev el s.   v ar ia bl es  a re  s im ila r  to  t ho se  f or  a -le ve ls  e xc ep t  th at  t he y  ar e  na m ed  a sl ev el …  r at he r  th an  a le ve l…  s co re d  as  f or  a  l ev el s  (a =1 0,  b =8 ,  c= 6,  d =4 ,  e= 2,   el se =0 ).    m ea su re s  ar e  si m ila r  ex ce pt  t ha t  st ud en ts  h ad  t o  ha ve  t ak en  a t  le as t  fo ur  a s- le ve ls ,  an d  to ta ls  w er e  fo r  th e  be st  fo ur  a s- le ve ls  a ch ie ve d.    fo r  re as on s  w hi ch  a re  n ot  c le ar , f ew er   st ud en ts  h ad  4 +  a s- le ve ls  ( n= 18 77 )  th an  h ad  3 +  a -le ve ls  ( n=  2 76 4) .  a s- le ve l  gr ad es  s ho w ed   m or e  va ri ab ili ty  t ha n  a -le ve ls , o nl y  56 .3 %  o f  st ud en ts  s co ri ng  a  m ax im um  4 0  po in ts  f or  t he ir   be st  g ra de s,  c om pa re d  w it h  73 .0 %  o f  st ud en ts  g ai ni ng  3 0  po in ts  f ro m  t he ir  b es t  th re e  a - le ve ls .   gc se  ( ge ne ra l c er tif ic at e  of  e du ca tio n) .  v ar ia bl es  a re  b ro ad ly  s im ila r  to  t ho se  f or  a -le ve ls   ex ce pt  t ha t  th ey  a re  n am ed  g cs e…  r at he r  th an  a le ve l…  g cs e  re su lt s  w er e  on ly  a va ila bl e  fo r  th e  20 09  e nt ry  c oh or t.  s in gl e  su bj ec ts  w er e  sc or ed  a s  a *= 6,  a =5 , b =4 , c =3 , d =2 , e =1 , e ls e  =0 ,  an d  do ub le  s ci en ce  a nd  o th er  s ub je ct s  w er e  sc or ed  a s  a *a *= 12 , a *a =1 1,  e tc , a nd  c ou nt ed  a s  tw o  g cs es  t ak en .   v er y  fe w  s tu de nt s  ha d  ei gh t  or  f ew er  g cs es , a nd  t he re fo re  o ve ra ll   s co re s  w er e  th er ef or e  ba se d  on  t he  n in e  be st  g ra de s  . g cs e  sc or es  w er e  av ai la bl e  fo r  93 0  st ud en ts ,  an d  w er e  m or e  va ri ab le  t ha n  a -le ve ls  o r  a s- le ve ls ,  on ly  1 6. 6%  o f  st ud en ts  h av in g  th e  m ax im um  o f  54  p oi nt s  (e qu iv al en t  to  9  a *  g cs es ).  s co re s  w er e  ca lc ul at ed  f or  t he  f ou r  in di vi du al  c or e  sc ie nc es ,  an d  sc or e  w er e  al so  c al cu la te d  fo r  co m bi ne d  sc ie nc e  (t ak en  b y  32 .8 %  o f  st ud en ts ).  g cs e_ n um be r_ n on sc ie nc e_ ex am s:  b ec au se  a ll  st ud en ts  h ad   ta ke n  se ve ra l n on -s ci en ce  s ub je ct s,  t hi s  va ri ab le  w as  t he  n um be r  of  n on -s ci en ce  s ub je ct s  ta ke n.    sc ot tis h  hi gh er s.   m ea su re s  ar e  br oa dl y  si m ila r  to  t ho se  f or  a -le ve ls , e xc ep t  th at  n am es  b eg in   sq ah ig he r…  g ra de s  w er e  sc or ed  a s  a =1 0,  b =8 ,  c= 6  an d  d =4 .  st ud en ts  w er e  on ly  i nc lu de d  w ho  h ad  fi ve  o r  m or e  gr ad es  a t  h ig he rs ,  th e  fiv e  hi gh es t  be in g  su m m ed .   o th er  d iff er en ce s  fr om  a -le ve ls  a re  t ha t  th er e  is  n o  g en er al  s tu di es  c om po ne nt ,  an d  al m os t  al l  st ud en ts  w ill  


  3    ca te go ry   v ar ia bl es  u se d  in  t he  a na ly si s  n ot es  a nd  c om m en ts   ta ke  a  n on -s ci en ce  h ig he r.  r es ul ts  fo r  sc ot ti sh  h ig he rs  w er e  av ai la bl e  fo r  76 9  st ud en ts , 7 2. 4%   ga in in g  a  m ax im um  s co re  o f 5 0  po in ts  b as ed  o n  be st  fi ve  g ra de s.   ‘s co tt ish  h ig he rs  p lu s’ .   th is  i s  a  co ns tr uc ti on  o f  ou r  ow n,  r ef le ct in g  th e  fa ct  t ha t  al th ou gh   sc ot ti sh  h ig he rs  a re  s co re d  by  u ca s  an d  by  m os t  sc ot ti sh  u ni ve rs it ie s  as  a ,  b,  c  a nd  d ,  th e  u ca s  gr ad es  a re  a ct ua lly  a 1,  a 2,  b 3,  b 4,  c 5,  c 6,  a nd  d 7.  t he se  r es ul ts ,  w it h  tw o  ba nd s  at   ea ch  g ra de ,  ar e  tr ea te d  as  m ea ni ng fu l  by  m an y  en gl is h  un iv er si ti es  ( al th ou gh  n ot ,  it  w ou ld   se em , s co tt is h  un iv er si ti es ),  a nd  t he re fo re  w e  al so  s co re d  h ig he rs  o n  a  ba si s  of  a 1= 10 , a 2= 9,   b3 =8 ,  b4 =7 ,  c5 =6 ,  c6 =5 ,  an d  d 7= 4.  w e  ha ve  n am ed  t hi s  as  ‘ sc ot ti sh  h ig he rs  p lu s’ ,  an d  va ri ab le  n am es  b eg in  s q ah ig he rp lu s…  .    th es e  re su lt s  ha ve  a  w id er  r an ge  o f  sc or es ,  on ly   19 .9 %  o f s tu de nt s  ga in in g  th e  m ax im um  5 0  po in ts .   sc ot tis h  ad va nc ed  h ig he rs .  v ar ia bl e  na m es   be gi n  sq aa dv hi gh er pl us …   .  m an y  sc ot ti sh   un iv er si ti es  s ee m  n ot  t o  re qu ir e  a dv an ce d  h ig he rs , a n  ar gu m en t  ag ai ns t  th ei r  us e  be in g  th at   on ly  s el ec ti ve  s ch oo ls  h av e  th e  re so ur ce s  or  p ro vi de  t he  p os si bi lit y  of  s tu dy in g  a dv an ce d  h ig he rs , a nd  h en ce  t he re  a re  c on ce rn s  ab ou t  w id en in g  ac ce ss . w e  no te  h ow ev er  t ha t  in  t hi s  gr ou p  of  s tu de nt s,  o f  47 8  ap pl yi ng  f ro m  t he  s ta te  s ec to r,  9 3. 1%  h ad  o ne  o r  m or e  a dv an ce d  h ig he rs , c om pa re d  w it h  81 .8 %  o f  23 7  no n- st at e  se ct or  e nt ra nt s.  o ve ra ll,  5 73  s tu de nt s  in  t he   pr es en t  su rv ey  h ad  a t  le as t  tw o  a dv an ce d  h ig he rs  ( i.e .  74 .5 %  o f  th e  76 9  st ud en ts  w it h  h ig he rs ),  a nd  a  f ur th er  1 08  h ad  o ne  a dv an ce d  h ig he r.  w e  th er ef or e  al so  a ss es se d  th e  pr ed ic ti ve  v al ue  o f  a dv an ce d  h ig he rs .  sc or in g  w as  a s  fo r  "s co tt is h  h ig he rs  p lu s"  ( i.e .  a 1= 10 ,  a 2= 9,  b 3= 8,  b 4= 7,  c 5= 6,  c 6= 5,  a nd  d 7= 4) ,  w it h  sc or es  c al cu la te d  fo r  in di vi du al  c or e  sc ie nc e  su bj ec ts , a lo ng  w it h  hi gh es t  ov er al l s co re  a tt ai ne d.  2 2%  o f  th e  69 4  st ud en ts  w it h  at  le as t  on e  a dv an ce d  h ig he r  ha d  a  m ax im um  o f  10  p oi nt s  on  t he ir  b es t  a dv an ce d  h ig he r,  a nd  2 2. 6%  h ad   7  or  fe w er  p oi nt s.     o ve ra ll  m ea su re s  of  e du ca tio na l a tt ai nm en t.   a s  de sc ri be d  in  t he  t ex t,  a n  ov er al l m ea su re  o f  ed uc at io na l  at ta in m en t  w as   ca lc ul at ed   fo r  ea ch   st ud en t,   ed uc at io na la tt ai nm en tg ce   or   ed uc at io na la tt ai nm en ts q a  fo r  g ce  a nd  s q a  a ss es sm en ts .  th es e  va ri ab le s  w er e  ba se d  on  a   se t  of  e ig ht  o r  te n  m ea su re s  re sp ec ti ve ly , w it h  m is si ng  v al ue s  re pl ac ed  b y  th e  em  a lg or it hm ,  an d  th en  t he  f ir st  p ri nc ip le  c om po ne nt  e xt ra ct ed .  a  s in gl e  va ri ab le ,  ed uc at io na la tt ai nm en t  w as   cr ea te d  w hi ch   w as   th e  z  sc or e  of   ei th er   ed uc at io na la tt ai nm en tg ce   or   ed uc at io na la tt ai nm en ts q a,  w hi ch ev er  w as  n ot  m is si ng .   b ec au se  t he  p re se nt  a na ly si s  is   in te re st ed   in   m ea su re s  w it hi n  m ed ic al   sc ho ol s,   ed uc at io na la tt ai nm en tg ce   an d  ed uc at io na la tt ai nm en ts q a   w er e  al so  s ta nd ar di ze d  to  h av e  a  m ea n  of  z er o  an d  sd  o f  on e  w it hi n  ea ch  m ed ic al  s ch oo l c oh or t,  t o  pr od uc e  th e  va ri ab le s  ze du ca tio na la tt ai nm en tg ce  a nd   ze du ca tio na la tt ai nm en ts q a.   w e  al so   us ed   a  du m m y  va ri ab le ,  sq ao rg ce ,  to   in di ca te   w he th er  e nt ra nt s  ha d  ta ke n  sc ot ti sh  o r  ot he r  qu al ifi ca ti on s.     n ot e  th at  i n  th e  pa pe r  on   co ns tr uc t  v al id it y  [3 5]  t he  u ns ta nd ar di ze d  m ea su re s  w er e  us ed , i n  or de r  th at  in fo rm at io n  on   ap pl ic an ts  a s  w el l a s  en tr an ts  c ou ld  b e  on  a  c om m on  s ca le .   u kc a t  m ea su re s  zu kc at to ta l   d at a  w er e  pr ov id ed  b y  th e  u kc a t  co ns or ti um , w it h  so m e  ad di ti on al  m ea su re s  ca lc ul at ed  b y 


  4    ca te go ry   v ar ia bl es  u se d  in  t he  a na ly si s  n ot es  a nd  c om m en ts   zu kc at ab st ra ct re as on in g  zu kc at de ci si on an al ys is   zu kc at qu an tit at iv er ea so ni ng    zu kc at ve rb al re as on in g    u kc at sk ip pe d    u kc at da yo ft ak in gp ct ile ra nk   u kc at ex am se rie sc od e  u kc at ca nd pe rs ch oo l  h ic  i n  d un de e.  t he  o ve ra ll  m ea su re  o f  pe rf or m an ce  w as  t he  t ot al  s co re ,  u kc at to ta l,  an d  th er e  w er e  al so   sc or es   on   th e  fo ur   su bs ca le s  u kc at ab st ra ct re as on in g,   u kc at de ci si on an al ys is,    u kc at qu an tit at iv er ea so ni ng ,  an d   u kc at ve rb al re as on in g.  e ac h  of  t he  m ea su re s  w as  a ls o  st an da rd is ed  a s  a  z- sc or e  w it hi n  m ed ic al  s ch oo ls  a nd  c oh or ts ,  to   gi ve   zu kc at to ta l,  w it h  th e  fo ur   su bs ca le s  be in g  zu kc at ab st ra ct re as on in g,   zu kc at de ci si on an al ys is ,   zu kc at qu an tit at iv er ea so ni ng , a nd   z u kc at ve rb al re as on in g,   th er e  w as   al so   in fo rm at io n  on   th e  da te   of   ta ki ng   u kc a t,   th e  va ri ab le   u kc at da yo ft ak in gp ct ile ra nk  g iv in g  re la ti ve  d at e  of  t ak in g  th e  te st  w it hi n  co ho rt s,  l ow   sc or es  in di ca ti ng  e ar ly  t ak er s  of  t he  t es t.  n ot  a ll  ca nd id at es  a ns w er ed  a ll  qu es ti on s,  in  m os t  ca se s  pr ob ab ly  b ec au se  t he y  ra n  ou t  of  t im e,  a nd  a s  a  re su lt  o n  av er ag e  ha d  lo w er  s co re s  th an  if  t he y  ha d  gu es se d  at  it em s,  t he  m ea su re  u kc at sk ip pe d  gi vi ng  t he  o ve ra ll  nu m be r  of   sk ip pe d  it em s,  w hi ch  h ad  a  m ed ia n  of  4 , o nl y  25 .9 %  o f  ca nd id at es  a ns w er in g  al l i te m s.   s om e  ca nd id at es  w er e  al lo w ed  e xt ra  t im e  be ca us e  of  s pe ci al  n ee ds ,  w hi ch  i s  in di ca te d  by  t he   va ri ab le  u kc at ex am se rie sc od e;  o n  av er ag e  th es e  ca nd id at es  h ad  h ig he r  ov er al l s co re s  th an   ot he r  ca nd id at es .   in  t he ir  a na ly se s  of  b m a t[ 36 ],  e m er y  et  a l r ep or te d  th at  c an di da te s  fr om  s ch oo ls  w it h  m or e  ex te ns iv e  ex pe ri en ce  o f  th e  te st  p er fo rm ed  s om ew ha t  di ff er en tl y,  a nd  t he re fo re  a  c on te xt ua l  va ri ab le , u kc at ca nd pe rs ch oo l,  w as  t he re fo re  p ro vi de d  by  h ic  w hi ch  c ou nt ed  t he  n um be r  of   ca nd id at es  t ak in g  u kc a t  in  a  s tu de nt ’s  s ch oo l s in ce  t he  t es t’ s  in ce pt io n.    sc ho ol in g  m ea su re s  se le ct iv es ch oo l  df es sh ru nk va   df es .a ve po in ts tu de nt   df es .a ve po in ts co re :  so m e  in fo rm at io n  on  s ch oo lin g,  i nc lu di ng  s ch oo l  co de s,  w as  a va ila bl e  fr om  u ca s,  a nd  t he   sc ho ol  c od es  c ou ld  a ls o  be  l in ke d  in to  c on te xt ua l  da ta  a va ila bl e  fr om  t he  d ep ar tm en t  fo r  ed uc at io n  (d fe ;  fo rm er ly  d fe s)  a t  ke y  st ag e  5  fo r  th e  ac ad em ic  y ea r  20 10  ( fil e  cr ea te d  m ay   20 11 ),  fo r  sc ho ol s  in  e ng la nd . t he  m er gi ng  o f t he  t w o  da ta se ts  w as  c ar ri ed  o ut  b y  h ic .   sc ho ol  t yp e  w as  a va ila bl e  fr om  t w o  se pa ra te  s ou rc es ,  u ca s  an d  d fe s.    in  u ca s’ s  da ta ,  of   48 11  s tu de nt s,  6 9  ha d  m is si ng  i nf or m at io n,  3 60  w er e  in  u ca s' s  'u nk no w n'  c at eg or y,  2 19   w er e  'a pp ly  o nl in e  u k' ,  an d  86  w er e  'o th er '.   o f  40 77  s tu de nt s  fo r  w ho m  i nf or m at io n  w as   av ai la bl e,  1 94 1  (4 7. 6% )  w er e  cl as si fie d  as  c om in g  fr om  s el ec ti ve  s ch oo ls  ( 'g ra m m ar  s ch oo l'  or  ' in de pe nd en t  sc ho ol '),  a nd  2 13 6  (5 2. 4% )  fr om  n on -s el ec ti ve  s ch oo ls  ( 'c om pr eh en si ve   sc ho ol ',  'f ur th er /h ig he r  ed uc at io n' ,  's ix th  f or m  c en tr e'  a nd  's ix th  f or m  c ol le ge ').    th e  d fe s  da ta ba se  a ls o  ha d  a  m ea su re  o f  se le ct iv e  sc ho ol in g,  w it h  in fo rm at io n  on  2 83 0  in di vi du al s  av ai la bl e,  o f  w ho m  1 38 7  (4 9. 0% )  at te nd ed  s el ec ti ve  s ch oo ls .  th e  ov er la p  of  t he  u ca s  an d  d fe s  cl as si fic at io ns  w as  g oo d,  b ut  n ot  p er fe ct .  o ur  f in al  m ea su re ,  en ti tl ed  s el ec tiv es ch oo l  ha d  a  va lu e  of  1  if  e it he r  u ca s  or  d fe s  da ta  s ug ge st ed  a  s ch oo l w as  s el ec ti ve , a nd  o th er w is e  w as  0 . a lt og et he r  of  t he  4 81 1  in di vi du al s  in  t he  p ri m ar y  d at ab as e,  in fo rm at io n  w as  a va ila bl e  fo r  on e  or  b ot h  so ur ce s  in  4 11 4  ca se s,  o f  w ho m    19 86  ( 48 .3 % )  ha d  ev id en ce  o f  ha vi ng   at te nd ed  a  s el ec ti ve  s ch oo l.  co nt ex tu al  s ch oo l m ea su re s.  t he  d fe  d at a  ha d  a  to ta l o f  22  c on te xt ua l m ea su re s  on  s ch oo ls .  a ft er   a  ra ng e  of   pr el im in ar y,   ex pl or at or y  an al ys es   w e  co nf in ed   th e  an al ys es   to   th re e 


  5    ca te go ry   v ar ia bl es  u se d  in  t he  a na ly si s  n ot es  a nd  c om m en ts   va ri ab le s:  d fe ss hr un kv a,     w hi ch  is  a  m ea su re  o f  va lu e  ad de d  be tw ee n  ke y  st ag es  4  a nd  5 ,  an d  w as  a va ila bl e  fo r  th e  sc ho ol s  of  2 ,5 61  s tu de nt s;  d fe s. av ep oi nt st ud en t,  w hi ch  i s  a  m ea su re  o f  th e  av er ag e  po in ts  g ai ne d  by  e ac h  st ud en t  at  a  s ch oo l a cr os s  al l o f  th at  s ch oo l’s   ex am in at io n  en tr ie s,   an d  w as   av ai la bl e  fo r  th e  sc ho ol s  of   2, 58 6  st ud en ts ;  an d  df es .a ve po in ts co re , w hi ch  is  a  s im ila r  m ea su re  t o  th e  pr ev io us  o ne  e xc ep t  th at  t he  a ve ra ge   is  a t  th e  le ve l o f  ex am in at io n  en tr ie s  (r at he r  th an  s tu de nt s) , a nd  w as  a va ila bl e  fo r  th e  sc ho ol s  of  2 58 2  st ud en ts .   d em og ra ph ic   m ea su re s  u k  u ca s. m al e  ca n d. ag e  ca n d. ag eg t2 1  ca n d. ag e3 0p lu s  u ca s. et hn ic 2.   n at io na lit y  w as  b as ed  o n  th e  on lin e  in fo rm at io n  pr ov id ed  w he n  st ud en ts  t oo k  u kc a t;  o f  48 11  s tu de nt s,  4 59 8  (9 5. 6% )  w er e  u k  na ti on al s,  1 76  ( 3. 7% )  w er e  eu /e ea  n at io na ls  a nd  3 7  (0 .8 % ) w er e  fr om  o ut si de  t he  e u /e ea ; t he  b in ar y  va ri ab le  w as  c al le d  u k.   se x  w as  b as ed  o n  in fo rm at io n  pr ov id ed  b y  u ca s;  o f  48 11  s tu de nt s,  2 08 1  (4 3. 3% )  w er e  m al e  an d  27 30  ( 56 .7 % )  w er e  fe m al e.  t he  v ar ia bl e  w as  c al le d  u ca s. m al e,  s co ri ng  1 =m al e  an d  0  =f em al e.   ag e  w as  b as ed  o n  st at ed  a ge  in  y ea rs  w he n  ta ki ng  t he  u kc a t  te st , a nd  r an ge d  fr om  1 7  to  4 5  (m od e= 18 ,  m ea n  =  19 .5 5,  s d =2 .8 4) .  a ge  w as  m is si ng  i n  45  c as es ,  28 .9 %  o f  st ud en ts  w er e  ag ed  2 1+ ,  an d  1. 3%  w er e  ag ed  3 0+ .  th e  va ri ab le  w as  c al le d  ca n d. ag e.  a dd it io na l  0/ 1  va ri ab le s  w er e  cr ea te d  to  i nd ic at e  w he th er  c an di da te s  w er e  21  o r  ol de r  or  3 0  or  o ld er   (c an d. ag eg t2 1,  c an d. ag e3 0p lu s) .  et hn ic ity  w as  b as ed  o n  th e  st an da rd  2 3  ca te go ri es  in  t he  u ca s  co di ng . e th ni ci ty  w as  m is si ng   in  6 9  ca se s,  f or  2 14  w as  c od ed  a s  u nk no w n,  a nd  f or  1 92  w as  c od ed  a s  'n ot  g iv en '.  o n  a  si m pl ifi ed  s ix  c at eg or y  ba si s  th er e  w er e  30 57  w hi te ,  57 7  in di an  s ub -c on ti ne nt ,  22 3  o th er   a si an , 9 2  bl ac k,  1 40  m ix ed  a nd  6 0  o th er . f or  s im pl ic it y,  a nd  a s  in  m an y  ot he r  st ud ie s[ 52 ])  w e  gr ou pe d  st ud en ts  a s  w hi te  ( n= 3, 05 7,  7 3. 7% )  an d  n on -w hi te  ( n= 1, 09 2,  2 6. 3% ),  i n  a  va ri ab le   ca lle d  u ca s. et hn ic 2.    so ci o- ec on om ic   m ea su re s  ca n d. n ss ec   im do ve ra llq ua lit yd ec ile   im d1 in co m ed ec ile (w it h  tw o  su bs ca le s)   im d2 em pl oy m en td ec ile   im d3 he al th di sa bi lit ys ki lls de ci le   im d4 ed uc at io nd ec ile  (w it h  tw o  su bs ca le s) ,  im d5 ho us in ga nd se rv ic es de ci le  ( w it h  tw o  su bs ca le s)   im d6 cr im ed ec ile ,  im d7 li vi ng en vi ro nm en td ec ile   (w it h  tw o  su b- sc al es ).    so ci o- ec on om ic   cl as sif ic at io n  (s ec ),   va ri ab le   ca n d. n ss ec ,  w as   ba se d  on   th e  on lin e  in fo rm at io n  pr ov id ed  b y  st ud en ts  t ak in g  u kc a t,  w ho  c om pl et ed  t he  a bb re vi at ed  v er si on  o f  th e  se lf- co de d  qu es ti on na ir e  (n s- se c)  p ro vi de d  by  u k  n at io na l s ta ti st ic s* . s ec  w as  c al cu la te d  se pa ra te ly  f or  e ac h  pa re nt  ( if  p ro vi de d) ,  an d  th e  hi gh er  s ec  u se d.  o f  4, 09 1  in di vi du al s  w it h  us ab le  in fo rm at io n,  3 ,7 40  ( 91 .4 % )  w er e  in  s ec  g ro up  1 ,  10 5  (2 .6 % )  in  g ro up  2 ,  14 6  (3 .6 % )  in   gr ou p  3,  3 8  (0 .9 % ) i n  gr ou p  4,  a nd  6 2  (1 .5 % ) i n  gr ou p  5,  w he re  g ro up  1  h as  t he  h ig he st  s ta tu s.     so ci o- ec on om ic  c on te xt ua l m ea su re s.  f or  a pp lic an ts  li vi ng  in  e ng la nd , p os tc od es  f or  p la ce  o f  re si de nc e  w er e  us ed  t o  lin k  to  s m al l-a re a  ce ns us  s ta ti st ic s  co lle ct ed  a s  pa rt  o f  th e  en gl is h  in di ce s  of  d ep ri va ti on [4 4]  a nd  w hi ch  g en er at e  a  se ri es  o f  in di ce s  of  m ul ti pl e  d ep ri va ti on   (i m d ).  f or  e as e  of  a na ly si s,  h ic  c on ve rt ed  t he  m ea su re s  to  d ec ile s,  l ow  s co re s  in di ca ti ng   gr ea te r  de pr iv at io n.   im do ve ra llq ua lit yd ec ile   pr ov id es   an   ov er al l  si ng le   in di ca to r  of                                                                                          *  h ttp :// w w w .o ns .g ov .u k/ on s/ gu id e- m et ho d/ cl as si fic at io ns /a rc hi ve d- st an da rd -c la ss ifi ca tio ns /n s- se c/ se lf- co de d- ve rs io n- of -n s- se c/ in de x. ht m l 


  6    ca te go ry   v ar ia bl es  u se d  in  t he  a na ly si s  n ot es  a nd  c om m en ts     de pr iv at io n.  i n  ad di ti on  t he re  a re  1 5  m or e  de ta ile d  sc al es  a nd  s ub sc al es ,  w ho se  n am es  a re   m od er at el y  se lf- ex pl an at or y:   im d1 in co m ed ec ile   (w it h  tw o  su bs ca le s) ,     im d2 em pl oy m en td ec ile ,  im d3 he al th d is ab ili ty sk ill sd ec ile ,  im d4 ed uc at io nd ec ile  ( w it h  tw o  su bs ca le s) ,  im d5 ho us in ga nd se rv ic es de ci le   (w it h  tw o  su bs ca le s) ,  im d6 cr im ed ec ile ,  an d  im d7 li vi ng en vi ro nm en td ec ile  ( w it h  tw o  su b- sc al es ).    n ot e  th at  a lt ho ug h  th es e  sc al es  a re   de sc ri be d  in  t er m s  of  d ep ri va ti on ,  th ey  a re  s co re d  as  1 =h ig h  de pr iv at io n  an d  10  =  l ow   de pr iv at io n,  a nd  t he re fo re  a re  r en am ed  a s  ‘q ua lit y’  s o  th at  h ig he r  sc or es  i nd ic at e  a  hi gh er   qu al it y  on  t he  m ea su re .   


  7    table 2.  simple pearson correlations of key measures with a range of demographic, school, social and ukcat process  measures. note:  measures in italics are contextual measures, and should be treated with care as they describe the  student's environment rather than the student themselves. key: * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<.001.  correlations with p<.05 are  also shown in bold. names in bold in parentheses are variable names as described in table 1).      educational  attainment  (zeducational  attainment)  3 /5 best a-levels/  highers  (alevels_totalbest  sqahighers_totalbest)  ukcat total score  (zukcattotal)  overall medical  school score  (overallscore)  d em og ra ph ic  m ea su re s uk national (uk)  .008  (3432)  .000 / -.042  (2764/ 769)  .060 ***  (4811)  -.007  (4811)  male (ucas.male) -.037 * (3432)  .026 / .058  (2764 / 769)  .061 ***  (4742)  -.039 **  (4742)  aged 21+ (cand.agegt21) n/a n/a -.060 *** (4766)  .080 ***  (4766)  aged 30+ (cand.age30plus) n/a n/a -.023  (4766)  -.003  (4766)  ethnic2 (non-white) (ucas.ethnic2) -.053 ** (3221)  -.062 ** / -.033  (2549 / 766)  -.141 ***  (4149)  -.142 ***  (4149)  sc ho ol  m ea su re s selective schooling (selectiveschool)  .051 **  (3432)  .038 * / .120 ***  (2764 / 769)  .075 ***  (4811)  -.101 ***  (4811)  dfes value added ks 5  (dfesshrunkva)  -.012  (2092)  .012 / n/a  (2119)  -.014  (2561)  -.049 *  (2561)  dfes average points per student  (dfes.avepointstudent)  .085 ***  (2114)  .127 *** / n/a  (2141)  .097 ***  (2586)  -.065 ***  (2586)  dfes average points per exam entry  (dfes.avepointscore)  .111 ***  (2109)  .101 *** / n/a  (2136)  .044 *  (2582)  -.111 ***  (2582)  so ci al  b ac kg ro un d  socio-economic classification (sec) (1=high  5=low) (cand.nssec)  -.058 *  (2939)  -.084 *** / -.046  (2356 / 675)  -.056 ***  (4091)  -.011  (4091)  overall deprivation decile  (1= high, 10 = low deprivation)  (imdoverallqualitydecile)  .079 ***  (2275)  .076 *** / n/a  (2307)  .113 ***  (3074)  .032  (3074)  income deprivation decile  (imd1incomedecile)  .078 ***  (2275)  .083 *** / n/a  (2307)  .125 ***  (3074)  .039 *  (3074)  employment deprivation decile  (imd2employmentdecile)  .063 **  (2275)  .073 *** / n/a  (2307)  .109 ***  (3074)  .008  (3074)  health disability decile  (imd3healthdisabilityskillsdecile)  .055 **  (2275)  .048 * / n/a  (2307)  .098 ***  (3074)  .016  (3074)  education deprivation decile  (imd4educationdecile)  .056 **  (2275)  .064 ** / n/a  (2307)  .083 ***  (3074)  -.019  (3074)  housing and services deprivation decile  (imd5housingandservicesdecile)  .046 *  (2275)  .035 / n/a  (2307)  -.024  (.176)  .059 ***  (3074)  crime deprivation decile  (imd6crimedecile)  .061 **  (2275)  .040 / n/a  (2307)  .100 ***  (3074)  .062 ***  (3074)  living environment decile  (imd7livingenvironmentdecile)  .049 *  (2275)  .036 / n/a  (2307)  .066 ***  (3074)  .042 *  (3074)  u kc a t  m ea su re s  ukcat questions skipped/missed  (ukcatskipped)  .000  (3432)  -.015 / -.041  (2764 / 769)  -.310 ***  (4811)  -.005  (4811)  ukcat percentile day of taking test  (ukcatdayoftakingpctilerank)  -.092 ***  (3432)  -.059 ** / -.018  (2764 / 769)  -.058 ***  (4811)  -.090 ***  (4811)  ukcat allowed extra time  (ukcatexamseriescode)  .007  (3432)  .014 / -.012  (2764 / 769)  .030 *  (4811)  .004  (4811)  ukcat school experience of test  (ukcatcandperschool)  -.029  (3295)  .038 / -.174 ***  (2630 / 754)  -.033 *  (4022)  -.033 *  (4022)  g ce  &  s q a  r es ul ts   three best a-levels  (alevels_totalbest)  .690 ***  (2725) - / -  .088 ***  (2764)  .177 ***  (2764)  four best as-levels  (aslevels_totalbest)  .605 ***  (1842)  .416 *** / -  (1865 / -)  .155 ***  (1877)  .184 ***  (1877)  nine best gcses  (gcses_totalbest)  .600 ***  (721)  .293  ***/ -  (723 / -)  .202 ***  (930)  .082 *  (930)  five best scottish highers  (sqahighers_totalbest)  .328 ***  (715) - / -  .040  (769)  .003  (769)  five best scottish “highers plus”  (sqahighersplus_totalbest)  .532 ***  (682)  - / .884 ***  ( - / 730)  .104 **  (730)  .137 ***  (730)  best scottish advanced higher  (sqaadvhighers_totalbest)  .776 ***  (639)  - / .249 ***  (- / 769)  .118 **  (681)  .362 ***  (681) 


  8        ta bl e  3.   c or re la tio ns  o f u kc at  s ub -s co re s  w ith  o ut co m es . c or re la ti on s  of  t he  u kc a t  su bs ca le s  w it h  ea ch  o th er , w it h  u kc a t  to ta l s co re , a nd  w it h  pr io r  ed uc at io na l a tt ai nm en t  (t hr ee   be st  a -le ve ls , f iv e  be st  h ig he rs  a nd  ze du ca tio na la tt ai nm en t) , a nd  m ed ic al  s ch oo l p er fo rm an ce  (o ve ra ll,  a nd  s ki lls  a nd  t he or y  as se ss m en ts );   * **  p <. 00 1;  * *:  p <. 01 ; *  p <. 05 .          a bs tr ac t  re as on in g  d ec is io n  a na ly si s  q ua nt it at iv e  re as on in g  v er ba l  re as on in g  o ve ra llm ar k  sk ill sm ar k  th eo ry m ar k  a bs tr ac t  re as on in g  (z u kc at ab st ra ct re as on in g)   1  .1 96 ** *  (4 81 1)   .1 90 ** *  (4 81 1)   .1 14 ** *  (4 81 1)   .0 80  * **   (4 81 1)   .0 53  * *  (3 18 4)   .0 52  *   (2 07 5)   d ec is io n  a na ly si s  (z u kc at de ci si on an al ys is)   .1 96 ** *  (4 81 1)   1  .1 56 ** *  (4 81 1)   .1 46 ** *  (4 81 1)   .0 90  * **   (4 81 1)   .0 56  * **   (3 18 4)   .0 77  * **   (2 07 5)   q ua nt it at iv e  re as on in g  (z u kc at qu an tit at iv er ea so ni ng )  .1 90 ** *  (4 81 1)   .1 56 ** *  (4 81 1)   1  .2 13 ** *  (4 81 1)   .0 76  * **   (4 81 1)   .0 44  *   (3 18 4)   .0 79  * **   (2 07 5)   v er ba l r ea so ni ng   (z u kc at ve rb al re as on in g)   .1 14 ** *  (4 81 1)   .1 46 ** *  (4 81 1)   .2 13 ** *  (4 81 1)   1  .1 15  * **   (4 81 1)   .0 28   (3 18 4)   .1 77  * **   (2 07 5)   to ta l u kc a t  sc or e  (z u kc at to ta l )   .6 04 ** *  (4 81 1)   .6 55 ** *  (4 81 1)   .5 83 ** *  (4 81 1)   .5 91 ** *  (4 81 1)   .1 48  * **   (4 81 1)   .0 75  * **   (3 18 4)   .1 60  * **   (2 07 5)   ed uc at io na l a tt ai nm en t  (z ed uc at io na la tt ai nm en t)   .1 44 ** *  (3 43 2)   .1 31 ** *  (3 43 2)   .1 33 ** *  (3 43 2)   .0 87 ** *  (3 43 2)   .3 62  * **   (3 43 2)   .2 10  * **   (2 24 0)   .3 51  * **   (1 40 7)   3  be st  a -le ve ls   (a le ve ls _t ot al be st )  .1 23 ** *    (2 76 4)   .1 21 ** *  (2 76 4)   .1 27 ** *  (2 76 4)   .0 62 **   (2 76 4)   .1 77  * **   (2 76 4)   .0 96  * **   (2 00 0)   .2 48  * **   (1 25 0)   5  be st  h ig he rs   (s q ah ig he rs _t ot al be st )  .0 83  *   (7 69 )  .1 29 ** *  (7 69 )  .2 02 ** *  (7 69 )  .0 70   (7 69 )  .0 03   (7 69 )   .0 27   (2 98 )  .0 74   (1 99 )       


  1    table 4:  comparison of the four outcome groups. the four outcome groups are compared in relation  to the various continuous measures of prior educational attainment, medical school performance and  ukcat scores.  values in cells are mean (sd, n). the levene test assesses whether the groups differ in  their variances (sds).      fail (a)  repeat 1st  year (b)  passed  after resits  (c)  passed all first  time (d)  anova  (r)  linear  trend  f(1,n)  anova  (r)  nonlinear  f(2,n)  levene  test  homo- genous  subsets   (s)  overall mark (p, q); all  cases  -2.644  (1.28, 96)  -1.924  (.99, 94)  -1.110  (.79, 565)  .235  (.80, 4056)  2843.8  p<.001  36.9  p<.001  p<.001 a,b,c,d  theory mark (p) -1.258  (.44, 29)  -1.322  (.82, 29)  -.654  (.76, 294)  .250  (.68, 1723)  619.9  p<.001  23.1  p<.001  ns ab, c, d  skills mark (p) -1.079  (.84,40)  -.891  (.87, 438)  -.616  (.90, 438)  .214  (.71, 2655)  602.8  p<.001  32.0  p<.001  p<.001  ab, bc,  d  totoal ukcat score  (ukcattotal)  2492  (192, 96)  2457  (230,94)  2486  (205, 565)  2544  (205,4056)  43.7  p<.001  6.8  p=.001  ns abc, ad  zukcat (p)  (zukcattotal )  -.121  (.95,96)  -.312  (1.01, 94)  -.186  (.99, 565)  .036  (.99, 4056)  25.3  p<.001  5.3  p=.005  ns abc, ad  ukcat abstract reasoning (p)  (zukcatabstractreasoning)  -.163  (.94, 96)  -.224  (1.02, 94)  -.096  (.97, 565)  .022  (1.00, 4056)  13.1  p<.001  0.75  ns  ns abcd  ukcat decision analysis (p)  (zukcatdecisionanalysis)  -.064  (1.08, 96)  -.302  (.99, 94)  -.129  (.98, 565)  .026  (.995, 4056)  14.01  p<.001  3.70  p=.025  ns abc, ad  ukcat quantitative reasoning (p)  (zukcatquantitativereasoning)  .045  (.97, 96)  -.110  (1.03, 94)  -.116  (1.06, 565)  .018  (.99, 4056)  3.38  ns  3.38  p=.034  ns abcd  ukcat verbal reasoning (p)  (zukcatverbalreasoning)  -.087  (.97, 96)  -.136  (1.16, 94)  -.127  (.96, 565)  .023  (1.00, 4056)  9.56  p=.002  2.13  ns  ns abcd  educational attainment (p)  (zeducationalattainment)  -.441  (.942, 65)  -.653  (1.06, 60)  -.563  (1.14, 414)  .104  (.94, 2893)  156.1  p<.001  29.5  p<.001  p<.001 abc, d  three best a-levels  (alevels_totalbest)  28.89  (2.82, 56)  28.28  (1.58, 49)  29.06  (1.36, 333)  29.39  (1.22, 2326)  44.8  p<.001  6.47  p=.002  p<.001 a,bc,d  five best highers  (sqahighers_totalbest)  48.71  (1.57, 17)  47.50  (2.58, 16)  48.70  (2.46, 88)  48.99  (2.40, 648)  3.8  ns  1.66  ns  ns abcd  notes:  p. values are standardised within schools (note: this is not the case for the raw, ukcat total mark)  q. in a small proportion of cases, as described in the text, the overall mark is based on a normal score derived  from the four point categorical scale. for comparability with other analyses, the first row includes these cases.  however the second row analyses only cases where an overall mark was explicitly provided.   r. the denominator df, n, can be calculated as n-4, n is the total number of cases (provided in individual cells)  s. if values are together then they are not significantly different from one another and form a homogenous  subset with p>.05 using the ryan-einot-gabriel-welsch range test. as an example, "abc, ad" means that groups  a, b and c (fail, repeat 1st year and passed after resits) do not differ from one another; likewise groups a and d  (fail, passed all first time) do not differ from one another. group d (passed all first time) is significantly  different from repeat 1st year and passed after resits. "a,b,c,d" indicates each differs from each of the other  three groups, and "abcd" indicates no significant post hoc differences.      


  2    figure captions.    figure 1:  histograms of overallmark (a), theorymark (b) and skillsmark (c), and a scattergram of  skillsmark in relation to theorymark (d). the red line is the linear regression, and the green line a  lowess curve.    figure 2:  relationship of overallmark at medical school to educational attainment  (zeducationalattainment), separately for  a) gce qualifications (a-levels/as-levels/gcses), and b) sqa  qualifications (scottish highers and advanced highers). the red line is a linear regression, and the  green line is a lowess curve. the slope of the line for sqa qualifications (b=.423) is significantly larger  than that for gce qualifications (b=.349; interaction term, t=25.95, 3428 df, p<.001).    figure 3: a) performance of medical school entrants (vertical), expressed as a standardised (z) score,   in relation to the dfes measure of average point score per examination entry for the (english)  secondary school which the entrant attended. figures b)  and c) show the distribution of average  point scores for entrants from non-selective secondary schools (b, in grey) and selective secondary  schools (c, in blue). the grey and blue lines in a) show the fitted regression lines for non-selective  secondary schools (grey) and selective secondary schools (blue), for candidates with aaa at a-level  (top, thickest line), down through aab and abb to bbb (lowest, thinnest line). average point scores  are grouped into four groups, indicated by vertical dashed lines, and mean entry scores, with 95% ci,  are shown for entrants from non-selective secondary schools (black squares) and selective secondary  schools (blue circles), the largest squares/circles for aaa, the medium squares/circles for aab, and the  smallest squares/circles for abb. groups with small n and hence large cis are omitted.    figure 4:  scattergram showing relationship between overallmark at medical school, and ukcat  score (standardised within medical schools). mature students (green) and non-mature students (blue)  are shown separately, along with fitted linear regression functions. the crossing of the two lines is at  about 2.5 standard deviations below the mean, so that at almost all candidate ability levels, mature  students outperform non-mature students, with a steeper slope for mature students.      figure 5:  multilevel modelling of relationship of overallmark at medical school to educational  attainment (zeducationalattainment). see text for details.     figure 6:  multilevel modelling of relationship of overallmark at medical school to ukcat total score.  see text for details.                  


figure 1


figure 2


figure 3


figure 4


f ig u re  5


f ig u re  6
