

1  the effectiveness of police custody assessments in identifying suspects with intellectual  disabilities and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.    abstract  background: intellectual disabilities (id) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder  (adhd) are recognized psychological vulnerabilities in police interviews and court  proceedings in england and wales.  the aims of this study were to investigate: (a) the  prevalence of id and/or adhd among suspects detained at a large london metropolitan  police station and their relationship with conduct disorder (cd), (b) the impact of their  condition on police staff resources, (c) the effectiveness of current custody assessment tools  in identifying psychological vulnerabilities, and (d) the use of ‘appropriate adults’ in  interviews. method: 200 individuals in a police custody suite were interviewed and screened  for id, adhd (current symptoms), and cd.  results: the screening rates for these three  disorders were 6.7%, 23.5% and 76.3%, respectively. adhd contributed significantly to  increased requests being made of staff after controlling for cd and duration of time in  custody.  this is a novel finding. reading and writing difficulties and mental health problems  were often identified from the custody risk assessment tools, but they were not used  effectively to inform on the need for the use of an appropriate adult.  the frequency with  which appropriate adults were provided to support detainees in police interviews (4.2%)  remains almost identical to that found in a similar study conducted 20 years previously.  conclusions: the current findings suggest that in spite of reforms recently made in custodial  settings, procedures may not have had the anticipated impact of improving safeguards for  vulnerable suspects.  detainees with id and adhd require an appropriate adult during  police interviews and other formal custody procedures, which they commonly do not  currently receive.  the findings of the current study suggest this may be due, in large part, to 


2  the ineffective use of risk-assessment tools and healthcare professionals, which represent  missed opportunities to identify such vulnerabilities.    key words: intellectual disabilities, adhd, conduct disorder, iq, risk assessment, police.     background  the widely publicised bradley report [1] raised concerns about the inadequacy of the current  provision of health services within the criminal justice system (cjs) in england and wales.   in response a national health and criminal justice programme board was set up, bringing  together government departments for health, social care and criminal justice. the board  devised a national delivery plan committed to improving the management of offenders with  mental health problems, intellectual disability and personality disorder. the subsequent  reforms led to considerable change in police services, with changes in screening for  vulnerabilities and mental health facilities, and importantly healthcare provision and liaison  by clinical practitioners (i.e. doctors and nurses) who can access nhs records.  following  implementation, the success of these changes has yet to be evaluated.      vulnerabilities in police detainees with intellectual disabilities    concerns about the identification of vulnerabilities of suspects in police custody, and  suggested amendments to provisions for these, were raised in the early 1990s in studies for  the royal commission on criminal justice [2,3].  this work investigated vulnerabilities in  police detainees and identified high rates of individuals in the cjs with unrecognized  intellectual disability (id) or mental health problems [2].  the authors reported that id was  an important vulnerability for 8.6% of the 163 police detainees included in the study.  


3  however, there is large variability in reported rates of intellectual disability among persons in  police custody.  for example, the bradley review [1] reported on findings from studies  suggesting that the prevalence of intellectual disabilities in these settings ranged from 0.5% to  9% of detainees.  variation in the results of the different studies could be due to methods of  assessing intellectual disability, as practical constraints mean that it is not common to use full  diagnostic criteria in research (i.e. iq below 70, significant impairments of adaptive  behaviors, and childhood onset).  for example, the study by gudjonsson et al. [2] relied on an  assessment of intellectual functioning alone, and studies estimating prevalence in prison and  probation services have relied on screening measures [e.g. 4].  these studies therefore  provide estimates rather than precise rates of diagnosis, which is a limitation [5,6].        a broader evaluation of difficulties by the royal commission found that 35% of detainees  had “problems which might interfere with their functioning or coping ability during police  interviewing” [2, page 15].  hence the under-identification of vulnerabilities may have  serious consequences in terms of impaired capacity to understand their legal rights and cope  effectively with police questioning in custody [3, 7-11].    for almost 30 years, the police and criminal evidence act (pace) [12] and its  accompanying codes of practice have recommended that vulnerable individuals are provided  with special legal protection.  this includes the presence of an ‘appropriate adult’ during  police interviews and a warning to the jury at trial “that there is a special need for caution  before convicting the accused in reliance on the confession” [see 13, p259]. the role of an  ‘appropriate adult’ is to provide support and advice to people with id and other mental  health difficulties [14], and is the main protection for juveniles (detainees aged under 17) and  ‘mentally vulnerable’ detainees during interviews by police.  however, such provisions can 


4  only be implemented when vulnerabilities have been recognised [1-3,15].   to facilitate this,  a royal commission study [3] recommended a self-identification process whereby detainees  participate in a risk assessment screen.  unfortunately, this did not appear to have been  successful for ‘mentally vulnerable’ detainees due to continued failure of identification and  when vulnerabilities were identified their needs for an appropriate adult were often not  appropriately acted upon [14].  the importance of early identification of relevant and  pertinent vulnerabilities in the interview process is to ensure fairness and justice [7].     vulnerabilities in police detainees with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (adhd)    the focus of the previous consultation reports [2,3,15] has largely centered on the needs of  offenders with intellectual disability (id).  however, the pace codes of practice have been  regularly updated and the criteria for psychological vulnerabilities of detainees broadened  beyond id to include “mentally disordered or otherwise mentally vulnerable detained person”  [16, code c, p61].  the term ‘mentally vulnerable’ refers to “psychological characteristics or  mental state which render a witness prone, in certain circumstances, to providing information  which is inaccurate, unreliable or misleading” [7, p166].  it “applies to any detainee who,  because of their mental state or capacity, may not understand the significance of what is said,  of questions or of their replies” [16, section 1g, page 5].  relevant vulnerabilities in a given  case may include low intelligence, inability to focus on or cope with the questioning, and  high suggestibility or compliance [13]. this includes people with adhd who present with  symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, impulsivity [17]; executive function deficits [18-21];  disorganization in their behavior and personality [22] and functional deficits in educational,  social, and occupational domains [23].  in addition, these individuals tend to give a  disproportionate number of ‘don’t know’ responses when questioned, which may be 


5  misconstrued as being uncooperative [11], and are prone to make false confessions during  police questioning [24,25].  once in a custodial environment, offenders with adhd can  present a management problem as their symptoms are reportedly associated with aggressive  behaviours [26,27], most likely due to their emotional lability and behavioural disinhibition  [28].  this may be similarly relevant to police custodial settings where impatience and  restlessness may be expressed as requests being made of staff.       compared with a general population rate of 5.9-7.1% for childhood adhd [29] and 2.5% for  adult adhd [30], international studies have consistently reported disproportionately higher  rates of adhd in offenders [e.g. 26,27,31-35].  a 30-year follow-up study conducted in the  usa reported, based on a review of arrest records, that boys identified as hyperactive were  significantly more likely to have been arrested, incarcerated, or convicted in adulthood,  compared with age-matched controls [36].  however, the relationship between adhd and  criminality may be distorted by its association with comorbid conduct disorder [25].  indeed,  in one study, the majority of the sample had conduct problems, making it difficult to attribute  a causal role to adhd [36].      there is conflicting evidence from research as to the influence of each disorder on forensic  outcomes.  a follow-up study of childhood psychiatric inpatients (n=541) reported that those  with childhood conduct disorder (cd) or cd with combined hyperkinetic disorder were at  significantly greater risk for adult delinquency, whereas those without cd were no more  likely to commit future crime than those with any other psychiatric disorder [37].  in contrast,  it has been found that adhd significantly predicted arrest, conviction, or incarceration in  adulthood, even when controlling for comorbid cd [38].  given this discrepancy in the  literature, it seems prudent to control for cd when appropriate, particularly as adhd and 


6  cd are known to co-occur at a higher rate than chance [39]. it should also be noted that there  is an overlap reported between adhd and id [e.g. 19].  people with both disorders are likely  to have ‘double deficit’ in their cognitive and adaptive functioning, which may lead to greater  vulnerability in police interviews and in their capacity to cope more generally within the cjs  [19].  furthermore, a relationship has been reported been all three conditions, with evidence  that, among children, those with combined adhd and id exhibit greater conduct problems  than those with each condition in isolation [40].        the bradley report recommendations    pace and its accompanying codes of practice [12] do not appear to have been successful in  addressing police practices for vulnerable detainees.  nearly 20 years since the royal  commission on criminal justice report [2], the bradley report [1], based on nationwide  consultations with organisations at all stages of the offender pathway, suggested that the  needs of offenders with id, and those with mental health problems, often remain  unrecognized and undetected within the cjs. the bradley report recommended improved  screening of vulnerabilities and mental health facilities (i.e. through the presence of  healthcare practitioners [hcps] and access to nhs medical records) at police stations, which  are currently being implemented [16].     the updated code c of the pace codes of practice [16] stipulated that the custody officer  (or other custody staff) has to determine whether a detainee requires medical treatment, an  appropriate adult, assistance to check documentation, and/or an interpreter (section 35). in  addition, “chief officers should ensure that arrangements for proper and effective risk  assessments must follow a structured process which clearly defines the categories of risk to 


7  be considered and the results must be incorporated in the detainee’s custody record”  (sections 3.7 and 3.8, page 8). this responsibility involves implementing a response to a  specific risk assessment (e.g. to assess risk of self-harm and harm to others) and, if this risk is  deemed present, increasing levels of monitoring and observation, and calling a suitably  qualified hcp (section 3.9). in turn, this has led to the development of a new custody  record risk assessment screening tool (with information being derived from a variety of  sources, including records, observation, informants, and self-report).  at the present time this  is being incorporated into national police practice and consists of a formal document within  the custody record that provides (a) the custody officer’s risk assessment and (b) the  detainee’s self-reported risk assessment [41]. the focus is both on the needs of the detainee  and safety issues surrounding his or her detention. with this in mind, the main aim of the  current study was to investigate the effectiveness of this new assessment procedure in  identifying psychologically vulnerable detainees with id and adhd, and its impact on the  use of ‘appropriate adults’.    the study was conducted with a group of individuals who were arrested and detained in a  police custody suite in south london, where the bradley recommendations were being  implemented, in order to address the following hypotheses:    h1. rates of id and adhd in people presenting in police custody will be higher than  reported for the general population.    h2. significant comorbidity will be found between id, adhd and cd [39,40].   


8  h3. those with a higher score on screening measures of symptoms of id, adhd and cd  will make more requests for staff time.       h4.  those detainees currently screened symptomatic for adhd will consume staff  resources over and above cd and id (i.e., the adhd scores will significantly add to the  variance in requests after controlling for the effects of cd and id).      in addition to the above hypotheses, exploratory analysis was conducted to investigate  whether the police custody record risk assessment screening tool and/or hcp contact in  police custody, successfully identified vulnerable individuals leading to an increased use of  appropriate adults during police interviews.      methods  participants  the sample comprised 200 individuals in custody at a police station in south east london.   the mean age of the group was 27.5 years (sd = 10.5, range = 16 to 69), most being male  (n=185; 92.5%).  ethnic background was taken from the custody record for 194  participants, of whom 95 were classified as white (49.0%), 85 black (43.8%), 13 mixed race  (6.7%) and one asian (0.5%).  the participants were in custody for a range of alleged  offences (information available for 191 participants) including property (n=82, 43%),  violence (n = 48, 25%), criminal damage (n=17, 9%), public disturbance (n=12, 6%), drug- related (n=8, 4%), driving (n=5, 3%), sexual (n=2, 1%), and other offences (n=17, 9%), the  ‘other’ category  mainly including a warrant or breach of court restrictions/bail.  all  individuals were assessed by custody staff during a routine intake procedure for capacity to  participate in the study.  this included an evaluation of alcohol and drug intoxication or 


9  withdrawal, serious mental health problems, severe communication/comprehension problems  and risk of violence to the researcher).  these individuals were identified during routine  intake procedures carried out by custody officers with every detainee.  this resulted in a  small number of exclusions due to either intoxication and/or risk of violence to the  researcher, but the exact number of exclusions was not specifically recorded.  there were no  exclusions due to serious communication/comprehension problems and/or serious mental  health problems.      power calculation  in order to determine the sample size required to estimate the prevalence of id and adhd in  this population with good precision we used the following formula provided by daniel [42],  and made a finite population correction following the recommendations of naing and  colleagues [43]:      n = z2p(1-p)         d2    where n = sample size, z = z statistic for a level of confidence, p = expected prevalence or  proportion (in proportion of one; if 20%, p = 0.2), and d = precision (in proportion of one; if  5%, d = 0.05).    as recommended, we used a standard 95% confidence level for both calculations for which  the z statistic is 0.96.     


10  with regard to prevalence of id, we based our calculation on an expected prevalence rate of  7.5% reported by jackson [4] in probation services.  this rate was selected because the study  had used the ldsq (as used in the current study) and a population of offenders in the  community rather than a secure setting.  as the expected prevalence fell below 10%, naing  and colleagues [43] recommend that d should be half of p, therefore the d value used for the  id calculation was 0.04 (4% expressed as a proportion of one).  the estimated number of  participants required was 164.      with regard to prevalence of adhd, we based our calculation on an expected prevalence  rate of 19% found in a recent uk study in probation services [44].  this rate was selected  because it was obtained from a population of offenders in the community rather than a secure  setting.  the precision value of 5% was used for the adhd calculation as the expected  prevalence fell between the 10% and 90% band recommended, therefore the d figure used  was 0.05 (5% expressed as a proportion of one)”.  the estimated number of participants  required was 215.    the two estimated sample sizes are different mainly due to the different values of precision  and expected prevalence used in the calculations, as described by naing et al. [43].    measures  barkley scales for adhd in childhood and adulthood [45]  these self-report screens each comprise 18-items relating to dsm-iv classified symptoms of  inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity.  on each screen, nine items relate to problems of  hyperactivity/impulsivity and nine to inattention. each item is rated on a 4-point scale: ‘never  or rarely’ (0), ‘sometimes’ (1), ‘often’ (2), and ‘very often’ (3).  the individual is asked to 


11  rate items for their behavior in childhood and over the past six months (current/adulthood).   the barkley scales offer a total symptom count for the inattentive domain and the  hyperactive/impulsive domain (0-9 for each) and the cut-off criteria applied were: (i) six or  more adhd symptoms in either domain for retrospective childhood ratings; plus (ii) four or  more adhd symptoms from either domain for ‘current’ adhd ratings.       the barkley scales also include an assessment of impairment asking participants to rate, on a  four-point scale (0 = ‘never/rarely’, 1 = ‘sometimes’, 2 = ‘often’, and 3 = ‘very often’), the  functional impact of endorsed adhd symptoms.  impact is assessed for 10 domains  including home life, work or occupation, social interactions, community activities,  educational activities, dating or marital relationships, money management, driving, leisure or  recreational activities and management of daily responsibilities. the barkley current  symptom scale has been reported to have 75% sensitivity and 61% specificity on the  inattention scale and 69% sensitivity and 39% specificity for the hyperactivity/impulsivity  scale [46]. little other psychometric data are available on this measure. however, it has the  advantage of being based directly on the dsm-iv criteria for adhd and is commonly used  as a screening measure in research [45].     diagnostic interview for adhd in adults (diva) [47]  this semi-structured clinical interview was used to classify the diagnostic status of the  sample.  the interview systematically evaluates each of the 18 dsm-iv adhd symptom  items (9 each in the domains of attention and hyperactivity/impulsivity) for both current (i.e.  in the past six months) and childhood symptoms.  the diva also includes additional  questions to establish impairment from adhd symptoms (impairment criteria), in two or  more settings (pervasiveness criteria) and the age of onset of symptoms (age of onset 


12  criteria).   the dsm-iv recommendation is that, for a positive diagnosis, six items must be  endorsed in the same (or both) domain(s) for current and childhood symptoms.  however, a  distinction is made in the literature between ‘syndromatic’ and ‘symptomatic’ adhd, with  the latter requiring endorsement of fewer current symptoms (four, rather than six, out of nine)  [48].    this identifies those in partial remission of symptoms, and was applied in the current  study in order to reduce the likelihood of a type ii error at the screening stage.      learning disability screening questionnaire (ldsq) [15,49]  this questionnaire rates an individual based on 7 items tapping intellectual skills (e.g. can the  person read and write) and functional skills (e.g. can the person live independently).  a  higher score (range 0-7) indicates lower likelihood of intellectual disability and scores can be  converted to a percentage score to be compared with the cut-off percentage, as described in  the manual.    the ldsq has been reported to have good convergent validity when compared  with full-scale iq scores [15,50], with over 80% specificity and sensitivity, and has been  validated for use in forensic settings where it is also found to have acceptable psychometric  properties [15].    oregon adolescent depression project - conduct disorder screen (oadp-cds) [51]  this 6-item self-report screen asks individuals to rate frequency of adolescent conduct  behaviors on a 4-point scale.  possible scores range from 6-24 with a higher score indicating  greater presence of conduct disorder symptoms. the oadp-cds has been shown to have  good internal consistency, test–re-test reliability and good screening efficiency for detecting  lifetime cd.  as recommended, cut-off scores of 10 or higher for males and 8 or higher for  females were used to indicate presence of cd [51].  in the present study cd was measured 


13  retrospectively with an older age group and this methodology has been used successfully  previously in an older sample [25].      custody record review  a review of the custody record was conducted in order to extract relevant information to  test the hypotheses of the present study.  data were collected relating to:   • police procedures and provisions (i.e. if interviewed by police, seen by a hcp,  appropriate adult required).  • duration of time the detainee had spent in custody (i.e. time elapsed between the  individual being detained and the time of their record review being completed by the  researchers).  • requests made while in custody; this was the number of times each participant  requested food/drink, legal contact (e.g. solicitor), family contact, or made some other  request (e.g. for a blanket).  information pertaining to these requests was found to be  recorded routinely using similar wording across the small number of staff responsible  for responding to a buzzer pressed by a detainee.  there were no record reviews  completed where this information was not available.    custody record risk assessment screening tool  this tool is a standard assessment that is routinely administered to all detainees presenting at  the custody suite reception.  it is documented within the custody record.  the tool consists  of categorical data in the form of yes/no answers for questions pertaining to alcohol and  substance use, medical and/or mental health needs, ability to read and write, and additional  needs while in custody.  four questions completed by the custody officer and seven of the 


14  detainee-report questions were thought to be theoretically relevant to exploring whether the  screening tool successfully identified vulnerable individuals (see table 4).    procedure  following ethical approval by the king’s college london psychiatry, nursing and midwifery  subcommittee (reference pnm/10/11-116), participants were recruited at the custody suite  over a 12-week period in 2011.  all detainees deemed suitable by custody staff were  approached by a research assistant with a member of staff.  they were invited to take part in  a study investigating factors that might be associated with behavior in custody.  those who  were interested in participating were taken to a consultation room off the main custody area  where the research assistant provided an information sheet and a verbal explanation of the  study, and the participant had the opportunity to ask any questions.  those who reported  difficulties reading the information sheet, or those who did not wish to do so, had the  information sheet verbally read to them with opportunities to ask questions and clarify details  as required.  no individuals reported specific problems understanding the material when it  was verbally presented to them.  participants who then wished to take part provided their  written consent and completed the questionnaires.  around one third of participants  completed the questionnaires verbally with the researcher due to self-reported difficulties  with reading.  following the completion of the participant measures, the researcher  completed the record review.  ten participants consented to complete questionnaires but did  not give consent for researchers to examine their custody record. with regard to the  questionnaires, there was some missing data due to some detainees not wishing to complete  some of the measures. the precise number completed on each screening measure is reported  in the results section.   


15  results  prevalence rates in custody  intellectual disability   of the 195 participants who completed the ldsq, 13 (6.7%) screened positive for  intellectual disability (see table 1).      table 1    attention deficit hyperactivity disorder   four participants did not wish to complete the childhood screen.  of the remaining 196, 63  (32.1%) screened positive for adhd in childhood and 46 (23.5%) for current symptoms with  the largest subgroups being combined (14.8%) and hyperactive/impulsive (6.6%) (see table  1).  all 46 participants were invited to complete the diva and 24 did so (nine did not wish to  complete the interview and withheld consent for this part of the study, 11 interviews were  interrupted due to pressure on room space and/or time, and two individuals withdrew before  completing the interview).  a further four participants stopped half way through the diva  (as they were released from custody), although they met criteria for predominantly inattentive  type (this being the only section of the interview they had completed by that time).  from the  24 completed interviews, 19 participants (79.2%) had persisting adhd symptoms (i.e.  symptomatic persistence) and 14 individuals (58.3%) had syndromatic persistence (i.e. met  full dsm-iv criteria).  hence sensitivity of the screen was estimated to be 79%, which when  applied adjusted the prevalence rate for current adhd down from 23.5% to a more  conservative estimate of 18.5%.   


16  a period of civil unrest occurred in london during the time of the study known as the  ‘london riots’.  screening rates of childhood adhd in participants processed in the two  weeks following the london riots increased from 32% to 38%.  rates of current symptoms  remained consistent; 23.5% and 24%, respectively.  however, the increase in the child rates  was not significant.      conduct disorder  of the 194 participants who completed the oadp-cds, 148 (76.3%) screened positive for  childhood cd (see table 1).           co-morbidity  of those who screened positive for adhd (n=46), 44 (95.7%) completed the cd screen all  of whom screened positive for cd, and 6 (13%) had co-morbid id.  table 2 shows  correlations (two-tailed) between continuous scores on the diagnostic screens, including the  barkley impairment score, all of which were significant. we used cohen’s recommendation  for correlations of .10, .30 and, .50 as indicators of small, medium and large effect sizes,  respectively [52]. adhd childhood and current symptoms were highly correlated with cd  (large effect size), and more modestly correlated with id (medium effect size).  cd was most  strongly correlated with childhood (r = .77) and current (r = .65) adhd symptoms,  explaining 54% and 43% of the variance, respectively.    table 2 shows that there was a significant correlation between cd and id (r = - .30; medium  effect size), but this became non-significant (r = - .11; small effect size) after controlling for  current (adult) adhd symptoms in a partial correlation.   


17  table 2 about here    requests made on police time  in order to investigate the relationship of cd, adhd and id with  requests made for staff  time whilst in custody, one-tailed partial correlations were conducted between symptoms  (continuous screening scores) and the number of requests made to staff while in custody. the  duration of time between the individual being detained and the time of their record review  was recorded and controlled for, as longer time would have afforded greater opportunity to  make requests (r = .62, p < .001).  results indicated significant positive correlations between  the number of requests made and childhood cd (r=.23, p<.01), childhood adhd (r=.23,  p<.01), current adhd symptoms (r=.39, p<.001), adhd impairment (r=.29, p<.001), but  not for id (r = -.07, ns).    in order to explore if detainees who were currently symptomatic for adhd would consume  staff resources over and above cd, a hierarchical multiple regression was conducted (see  table 3).  cd (oregon total score) was entered in the first block along with time spent in  custody prior to the psychological assessment. adhd current symptoms were added in  block 2. in block 1, cd (β = .19) and length of time in custody (β = .60) contributed  significantly to the variance in requests for staff time, explaining 41% of the variance in the  number of requests made. entering adhd symptoms in block 2 added 6% to the total  variance (47%), with only adhd (β = .31) and time spent in custody (β = .59) contributing  significantly to the model, thus showing that adding adhd symptoms eliminated the effect  of cd.     table 3 


18                                identification of vulnerabilities using the custody risk assessment procedures  chi-square analyses were conducted to investigate the likelihood of individuals screening  positively for adhd endorsing particular items on the custody record risk assessment  screening tool.  the screening classifications were used rather than the diagnostic interview  for adhd as this would have substantially decreased the number of participants included in  the analysis.  the results are provided in table 4. those screening positive for adhd were  significantly more likely to have endorsed items on the self-report risk assessment referring  to having an existing illness or injury or other medical condition (or = 2.27), substance use  (or = 3.42), history of self-harm (or = 3.57), or current mental health problems (or =  4.37).  on the custody officer report, the only item that was significant was indications of  self-harm (or = 3.64).       table 4     a parallel analysis was not performed for the id group in view of the very small sample who  were likely to meet the criteria for id.      out of the 190 individuals who had consented for their custody record to be viewed, 85  (44.7%) were noted to have been seen by a hcp.  of these individuals, the current study  identified that 7 people screened positive for id and 24 screened positive for current adhd.   however, only 2 (28.6%) and 1 (4.2%) had an appropriate adult, respectively.      out of 166 individuals interviewed by police while in custody, 7 (4.2%) were provided with  an appropriate adult.  two of these suspects screened positive for id and one for adhd.  


19  of the remaining 159, 35 (22.0%) screened positive for current adhd and 9 (5.7%) screened  positive for id.     discussion  the findings in this study mostly support our hypotheses.  the prevalence rates of id and  adhd were both higher than those reported in the general population from normative  (general population) data.  with regard to adhd, rates were marginally higher for childhood  symptoms during a period of civil unrest, which suggests that rates of adhd in custody may  be influenced by local and situational factors for young detainees.  as expected, there were  high rates of co-morbidity, especially between adhd and cd, which are known to occur  together at a higher rate than chance [39].  we found the shared variance of cd with  childhood and current adhd symptoms to be 59% and 44% respectively, and cd was  associated with id because of its comorbidity with adhd.     our results indicate that adhd and cd symptoms predicted consumption of staff time, with  adhd symptoms driving requests of staff time after controlling for cd and duration of time  spent in custody.  one possible explanation for this is that those who are symptomatic for  adhd have increased behavioral disinhibition [e.g. 28] where impatience and restlessness  may be expressed as requests being made of staff. it is not possible to comment on the  legitimacy of the requests made or the time taken to deal with each request.  this would be  important to determine in future research as the apparent increased demand of people with  adhd in restricted custodial settings has staffing and resource implications. id was not  significantly correlated with requests for staff time, which may have been due to the fact that  very few of the detainees performed poorly on the ldsq. this supports the findings of  gudjonsson and colleagues from the royal commission study [2,3] and the view of murphy 


20  and mason [6] that very few people with severe id are likely to have contact with the cjs.   an alternative explanation for the non-significant relationship is that individuals with  intellectual disability may be particularly passive [e.g. 53] and not make requests of staff.     the exploratory analysis found that the implementation of improved assessment procedures  had not increased the rate of the use of appropriate adults beyond that reported 20 years  previously.  indeed, only two of the detainees screening positive for id and one for adhd  had been provided with an appropriate adult. this represents a serious flaw in the current  risk assessment process, especially given the recent initiative of hcps being present at police  custody suites.       the indicated rate of id in the current study (6.7%) is consistent with previous findings [2]  and suggests an increase from that found in the general population [e.g. 54]. the rate is  substantially lower than that reported among offenders in the søndenaa et al. study [55], but  it is consistent with that reported in the bradley report [1]. research has shown that many  people who have had their conviction overturned on appeal are of low intelligence [7,13,56- 58]. therefore, early identification of their vulnerabilities may prevent wrongful convictions  [9].  the same holds true for people with adhd. they are even less readily diagnosed than  those with id, in spite of the condition being more common, and the vulnerabilities  associated with their condition are not so well established within the cjs [59]. in the current  study, the detainees with adhd showed almost a ten-fold increase from the adult general  population when screens were used and about a seven-fold increase when a diagnostic  interview was used.  we found that the rate of adhd was 3 to 4 times higher than that for  id, which suggests that there are going to be many more detainees at police stations with  adhd than id. therefore, appropriate screening for people with adhd should in future be 


21  incorporated into the routine screening and hcp assessment and the findings appropriately  used to inform a decision on the need for an appropriate adult.     although every individual brought into custody completed a risk-assessment (completed by  themselves and by a custody officer), and almost half (44.7%) of this sample were  interviewed by a hcp, very few were identified as having difficulties that merited the need  for an appropriate adult. this under-identification has been recognized as one of the main  barriers to providing adequate support [e.g. 15].  nevertheless, it is positive that items of the  current risk assessment tool show promise for the identification of self-reported mental health  problems and officer-reported self harming behaviors in people with adhd.  this supports  the work of clare and gudjonsson [3] highlighting the importance of self-reported  vulnerabilities by persons detained at police stations as a potential ‘red flag’ for an  appropriate adult.       disappointingly, of those detainees interviewed by police only 4.2% were provided with an  appropriate adult and this figure is almost identical to the 4.3% reported over 20 years  previously in the royal commission study [2]. this shows that the current risk assessment  practices are failing and/or are not influencing the behavior of the police in terms of required  provision of appropriate adults. some of the risk assessment indicators, such as serious  reading and writing problems should have alerted the police and the hcp staff to the need for  an appropriate adult.  this suggests that the hcp staff employed at the police station do not  focus sufficiently on psychological or mental health symptoms, including those associated  with adhd and id. these individuals require an appropriate adult during police interviews  and other formal procedures (e.g. reading and signing documents), which they do not receive.   this practice needs to change. 


22    the findings should be considered in light of some particular strengths and limitations of the  study.  although only representing one large metropolitan police station, the findings are  likely to generalize to other police stations [2], but some regional variations may exist for the  custodial and interview process [13].  the study also has merit in the large sample of  detainees who participated, and our power calculations indicated that the study was well- powered to screen for id but marginally underpowered to screen for adhd. nevertheless,  this is the first study of adhd prevalence and associated behavior in police custody that has  included a full clinical diagnostic methodology to estimate adhd prevalence. the  researchers were not qualified healthcare practitioners in diagnosing adhd.  however, they  were trained to a level of good reliability by qualified clinical practitioners with expertise in  the assessment of adhd in adulthood and using the diva semi-structured interview.      other than the prevalence data for adhd using a clinical diagnostic methodology, all other  analyses were conducted based on a sample obtained from screening rates of adhd, cd,  and id.  hence diagnostic rates cannot be estimated for cd and id as the number of false  positive and false negative identifications are unknown.  in clinical practice, for example, a  diagnosis of id would require assessment of both cognitive and adaptive functioning, and an  assessment of childhood onset.  secondly, the screening and diagnostic data were based on  self-reported information.  this was a necessary methodological limitation as the high  turnover of detainees in the custody suite and the short periods of time they generally spend  in custody limited the opportunity for obtaining supplementary informant information.   nevertheless, adults with adhd have been found to be reliable in reporting attentional  problems [60].  there was also no detailed clinical interview of current symptoms relevant to  mental illness, such as depression. gudjonsson et al. [2] found that agitation and depressive 


23  symptoms were commonly found in a police station sample. furthermore anxiety and  depression among suspects detained for interviews has been associated with the reporting of  false confessions [61].      finally, the focus of the current study has been on identifying vulnerabilities considered  relevant to police custody procedures in relation to safeguards and reliability of police  interviews.  however, a further benefit of thorough screening procedures would be to  signpost individuals who may require more detailed assessments for support within  designated external services.    conclusion  in summary, id and adhd are recognized vulnerabilities for navigating the criminal justice  system, particularly early on during interviews and court proceedings.  as predicted, these  difficulties are more common in a police custody setting than in the general population yet  are largely unrecognized.  identification of these potential vulnerabilities does not appear to  have improved greatly with the introduction of the current risk-assessment tools.  the self- report version provided a more accurate predictor in the current study than the custody  officers’ evaluation, although this seems to be disregarded as it does not appear to be  routinely used to inform needs in custody.  in turn this resulted in a substantial number of  individuals who self-reported literacy and/or mental health problems not being provided with  the supportive mechanisms that they may be entitled to during the police interview process.   what is clear is that custody officers and hpc staff need to develop greater awareness about  the mental health and/or intellectual vulnerabilities presenting in police detainees, including  their screening and management.  this knowledge and information is essential to safeguard 


24  the police interview process through the implementation of effective systems to determine the  provision of appropriate adults.      competing interests   sy has been a consultant for janssen-cilag, eli-lilly and shire; given educational talks at  meetings sponsored by janssen-cilag, shire and flynn-pharma, novatis, eli-lilly; has  received research grants from the national institute of health research, janssen-cilag, eli- lilly and shire; sy was a member of the nice guideline development group for adhd. gg  has received speakers fees and travel honoraria from janssen, eli-lilly and shire.  eg and  os have no disclosures.    author contributions  all authors have contributed to data analysis and producing drafts of this article through  electronic discussions and face-to-face meetings. the final manuscript was read and  approved by all authors.  emily goodwin and ottilie sedgwick were the research assistants  who conducted the data collection.      acknowledgements  we acknowledge support from the department of health for funding the multi-agency  adhd research group (chaired by dr susan young).  we are grateful for the support of the  metropolitan police service, in particular mental health liaison officer inspector tony  aubrey, detective inspector graham price and his staff at lewisham police station custody  suite. we thank rafael gonzalez for assistance with some of the data analysis and linda  o’rourke for her assistance with the literature review.     


25  references    [1] bradley k: the bradley report: lord bradley’s review of people with mental health  problems or learning disabilities in the criminal justice system. london: department  health; 2009.  [http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publicationspolicyandguid ance/dh_098694].     [2] gudjonsson g, clare ich, rutter s, pearse j: persons at risk during interviews in  police custody: the identification of vulnerabilities. royal commission on criminal  justice report. cmnd.2263. london: hmso; 1993.    [3] clare ich, gudjonsson gh: devising and piloting a new "notice to detained  persons". royal commission on criminal justice. london: hmso; 1992.    [4]   jackson m: learning disabilities – wakefield probation service – final report.   department of health: yorkshire and humber improvement partnership; 2011.    [5] holland t, clare ich, mukhopadhyay t:  prevalence of ‘criminal offending’ by men  and women with intellectual disability and the characteristics of ‘offenders’:   implications for research and service development.  j intellect disabil res 2002, 46(1): 6- 20.    [6] murphy gh, mason j:  people with intellectual disabilities who are at risk of  offending. in: bouras n, holt g, editors. psychiatric and behavioural disorders in 


26  intellectual and developmental disabilities.  cambridge: cambridge university press; 2007.  p. 173-201.    [7] gudjonsson gh: invited article. psychological vulnerabilities during police  interviews. why are they important? legal and criminological psychology 2010, 15:161- 175.     [8] gudjonsson gh: false confessions and correcting injustices. new england law  review 2012, 46:689-709.    [9] gudjonsson gh, grisso t: legal competencies in relation to confession evidence. in:  felthous ar, sass h, editors.  international handbook on psychopathic disorders and  the law. volume 2. chichester: john wiley & sons; 2008.     [10] gudjonsson gh, joyce t: interviewing adults with intellectual disabilities.  advances  in mental health and intellectual disabilities 2011, 5;16-17.    [11] gudjonsson gh, young s, bramham j: interrogative suggestibility in adults  diagnosed with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (adhd). a potential  vulnerability during police questioning. personality and individual differences 2007,  43(4):737-745.    [12] home office: police and criminal evidence act 1984. london: hmso; 1985.   


27  [13] gudjonsson gh: the psychology of interrogations and confessions. a handbook.  chichester: john wiley & sons; 2003.    [14] medford s, gudjonsson g, pearse j: the identification of persons at risk in police  custody.  the use of appropriate adults by the metropolitan police.  london: jointly  published by the institute of psychiatry and new scotland yard; 2000.    [15] mckenzie k, michie a, murray a, hales c:  screening for offenders with an  intellectual disability: the validity of the learning disability screening questionnaire.   res dev disabil 2012, 33(3):791-795.    [16] home office: police and criminal evidence act 1984 (pace). code c. code of  practice for the detention, treatment and questioning of persons by police officers.  hmso, london; 2012.    [17] american psychiatric association. diagnostic and statistical manual of mental  disorders. dsm-iv.  washington dc: author; 1994.    [18] bramham j, ambery f, young s, morris r, russell a, xenitidis k, asherson p,  murphy d:  executive functioning differences between adults with attention deficit  hyperactivity disorder and autistic spectrum disorder in initiation, planning and  strategy formation.  autism 2009, 13(3):245-264.   


28  [19] rose ed, bramham j, young sj, paliokosta e, xenitidis k: neuropsychological  characteristics of adults with comorbid adhd and borderline/mild intellectual  disability.  res dev disabil 2009, 30(3):496-502.    [20] young s, morris rg, toone bk, tyson c:  planning ability in adults diagnosed with  attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a deficit in planning ability.  neuropsychology  2007, 21(5):581-589.    [21] young s, gudjonsson g:  growing out of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder:  the relationship between functioning and symptoms. journal of attention disorders 2008,  12:162-169.    [22] gudjonsson gh, wells j, young s: personality disorders and clinical syndromes in  adhd prisoners. journal of attention disorders 2012, 16:305-314.    [23] adamou m, arif m, asherson p, , bolea b, coghill d, gudjonsson g, halmøy a,  hodgkins p, müller u, pitts m, trakoli a, williams n, young s: occupational issues of  adults with adhd.  bmc psychiatry 2013, 13:59.  [24] gudjonsson gh, sigurdsson jf, einarsson e, bragason oo, newton ak: interrogative  suggestibility, compliance and false confessions among prisoners and their relationship  with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (adhd) symptoms. psychol med 2008,  38:1037-1044.   


29  [25] gudjonsson g, sigurdsson jf, sigfusdottir id, young sa: a national epidemiological  study of offending and its relationship with adhd symptoms and associated risk  factors. journal of attention disorders, in press.    [26] young s, gudjonsson gh, wells j, asherson p, theobald d, oliver b, scott c, mooney  a: attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and critical incidents in a scottish prison  population. personality and individual difference 2009, 46:265-269.    [27] young s, misch p, collins p, gudjonsson gh: predictors of institutional behavioural  disturbance and offending in the community among young offenders. journal of forensic  psychiatry and psychology 2011, 22:72-86.     [28] gudjonsson gh, sigurdsson jf, adalssteinsson t, young s: the relationship between  adhd symptoms, mood instability, and self-reported offending.  journal of attention  disorders 2013, 17:339-346    [29] willcutt eg: the prevalence of dsm-iv attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a  meta-analytic review. neurotherapeutics 2012, 9(3):490-499.    [30] simon v, czobor p, balint s, meszaros a, bitter i: prevalence and correlates of adult  attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: meta-analysis. br j psychiatry 2009, 194(3):204- 211.   


30  [31] gudjonsson gh, sigurdsson jf, young s, newton ak & peersen m: attention deficit  hyperactivity disorder:  how do adhd symptoms relate to personality among  prisoners.  personality and individual differences 2009, 47:64-68.    [32] rösler m, retz w, retz-junginger p, hengesch g, schneider m, supprian t,  schwitzgebel p, pinhard k, dovi-akue n, wender p, thome j: prevalence of attention  deficit-/hyperactivity disorder (adhd) and comorbid disorders in young male prison  inmates. eur arch psychiatry clin neurosci 2004, 254:365-371.    [33] young s, gudjonsson gh, misch p, collins p, carter p,  redfern j, goodwin e:   prevalence of adhd symptoms among youth in a secure facility: the consistency and  accuracy of self- and informant-report ratings. journal of forensic psychiatry and  psychology 2010, 21(2):238-246.    [34] rasmussen k, almvik mr, levander s: attention deficit hyperactivity  disorder, reading disability, and personality disorders in a prison population.   j am acad psychiatry law 2001, 29:186-193.    [35] ginsberg y, hirvikoski t, lindefors n: attention deficit hyperactivity disorder  (adhd) among longer-term prison inmates is a prevalent, persistent and disabling  disorder.  bmc psychiatry 2010, 10:112.     [36] satterfield jh, faller kj, crinella fm, schell am, swanson j, homer ld: a 30-year  prospective follow-up study of hyperactive boys with conduct problems: adult  criminality. j am acad child adolesc psychiatry 2007, 46(5):601-610. 


31    [37]  mordre m, groholt b, kjelsberg e, sandstad b, myhre am:  the impact of adhd  and conduct disorder in childhood on adult delinquency: a 30 years follow-up study  using official crime records. bmc psychiatry 2011, 11.    [38] gunter td, arndt s, riggins-caspers k, wenman g, cadoret rj: adult outcomes of  attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and conduct disorder: are the risks independent  or additive? ann clin psychiatry 2006, 18(4):233-237.    [39] waschbusch da: a meta-analytic examination of comorbid hyperactive impulsive- attention problems and conduct problems.  psychol bull 2002, 128:118-150.    [40] ahuja a, martin j, langley k, thapar a: intellectual disability in children with  attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. j pediatr 2013, 163: 890-895.     [41] national policing improvement agency: guidance on the safer detention and  handling of persons in police custody. second edition. london: author.     [42] daniel ww:  biostatistics: a foundation for analysis in the health sciences. new  york: john wiley & sons; 1999.    [43] naing l, winn t, rusli bn: practical issues in calculating the sample size for  prevalence studies.  archives of orofacial sciences 2006, 1: 9-14.   


32  [44] adamou m: prevalence of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in the west  yorkshire probation population.  presented at the ‘from classroom to courtroom: adhd  and the criminal justice system’ conference. broadmoor hospital, crowthorne, united  kingdom, 2012.    [45] barkley ra: attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a handbook for diagnosis and  treatment.  2nd edition.  new york: guilford press; 1998.     [46] quinn ca: detection of malingering in assessment of adult adhd. archives of  clinical neuropsychology 2003, 18:379–395.    [47] kooij jj, francken mh: diagnostic interview for adhd in adults. 2010 [available  from http://www.psyq.nl/files/1263005/diva_2_en.pdf]    [48] kooij jjs, buitelaar jk, van den oord ej, furer jw, rijnders cat, hodiamont ppg:  internal and external validity of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in a population  based sample of adults. psychol med 2005, 35:817-827.    [49] mckenzie k, paxton d:  learning disability screening questionnaire.  edinburgh:  gcm records; 2005.    [50] mckenzie k, paxton d: promoting access to services: the development of a new  screening tool. learning disability practice 2006, 9(6):17–21.   


33  [51] lewinsohn pm, rohde p, farrington dp: the oadp-cds: a brief screener for  adolescent conduct disorder. j am acad child adolesc psychiatry 2000, 39:888–895.    [52] cohen j: a power primer. psychol bull 1992, 112:155-159.    [53]  knox m, mok m, parmenter, tr: working with the experts: collaborative research  with people with an intellectual disability.  disability and society 2000, 15(1): 49-61.    [54] emerson e, hatton c, robertson j, roberts h, baines s, evison f, glover g: people  with learning disabilities in england 2011.  improving health and lives: learning  disability public health observatory; 2012.      [55] søndenaa e, rasmussen k, nøttestad ja:  forensic issues in intellectual disability.  current opinion in psychiatry 2008, 21(5):449-453.     [56] drizin sa, leo ra: the problem of false confessions in the post-dna world. north  carolina law review 2004, 82:891–1007.    [57] garrat, bl: convicting the innocent. london: harvard university press; 2011.    [58] perske r: false confessions from 53 persons with intellectual disabilities: the list  keeps growing. intellectual and developmental disabilities 2008, 46:468-479.    [59] young s, adamou m, bolea b, gudjonsson g, müller u, pitts m,  thome j,  asherson  p: the identification and management of adhd offenders within the criminal justice 


34  system: a consensus statement from the uk adult adhd network and criminal justice  agencies. bmc psychiatry 2011, 11:116.     [60] young s. gudjonsson gh: neuropsychological correlates of the yaq-s and yaq-i  self- and informant-reported adhd symptomatology, emotional and social problems  and delinquent behaviour.  br j clin psychol 2005, 44:47-57.    [61] sigurdsson jf, gudjonsson gh, einarsson e, gudjonsson g: differences in personality  and mental state between suspects and witnesses immediately after being interviewed by  the police. psychology, crime and law 2006, 12:619–628. 


additional files provided with this submission: additional file 1: revision title page sent 26.7.13.doc, 25k http://www.biomedcentral.com/imedia/1979931722104153/supp1.doc additional file 2: revised tables 23.10.13.docx, 29k http://www.biomedcentral.com/imedia/1825972910111421/supp2.docx
