

1      characteristics, changes and influence of body composition during a  4486km transcontinental ultramarathon. results from the transeurope  footrace mobile whole body mri-project.    schütz uhw1,2, billich c1, könig k3, würslin c3, wiedelbach h1, brambs hj1, machann j 3,4            1 department of diagnostic and interventional radiology, university hospital of ulm,  germany  2 outpatient rehabilitation centre at university hospital of ulm, germany  3 section on experimental radiology, department of diagnostic and interventional  radiology, university hospital of tübingen, germany  4 institute for diabetes research and metabolic diseases (idm) – metabolic imaging – of the  helmholtz center munich at university of tübingen (paul langerhaus institute tübingen),  germany                                address of correspondence:    uwe h.w. schütz, m.d.  department of diagnostic and interventional radiology, university hospital ulm  albert-einstein-allee 23, 89081 ulm, germany  outpatient rehabilitation centre at university hospital of ulm, germany  pfarrer-weiß-weg 10, 89073 ulm, germany  phone: ++49 731 50061192, ++49 731 964293 112, ++49 171 7628003  e-mail: uwe.schuetz@rocketmail.com         


2    abstract    background. nearly nothing is known about the medical aspects of runners doing a  transcontinental ultramarathon over several weeks. the results of differentiated measurements  of changes in body composition during transeurope footrace 2009 using a mobile whole  body magnetic resonance (mr) imager are presented and proposed influence of visceral and  somatic adipose and lean tissue distribution on performance tested.    methods. 22 participants were randomly selected for the repeated mr measurements  (intervals: 800 km) with a 1.5 tesla mr scanner mounted on a mobile unit during the 64- stage 4486 km ultramarathon. a standardized and validated mri protocol was used: t1  weighted turbo spin echo sequence, echo time 12 ms, repetition time 490 ms, slice thickness  10mm, slice distance 10mm (breath holding examinations). for topographic tissue  segmentation and mapping a modified fuzzy c-means algorithm was used. a semi-automatic  post-processing of whole body mri data sets allows reliable analysis of the following body  tissue compartments: total body volume (tv), total somatic (tsv) and total visceral volume  (tvv), total adipose (tat) and total lean tissue (tlt), somatic (slt) and visceral lean  tissue (vlt), somatic (sat) and visceral adipose tissue (vat), somatic adipose soft tissue  (sast). specific volume changing was tested on significance. tests on difference and  relationship regarding prerace and race performance and non-finishing were done using  statistical software spss.    results. total, somatic and visceral volumes showed a significant decrease throughout the  race. adipose tissue showed a significant decrease compared to start at all measurement times  for tat, sast and vat. lean adipose tissues decreased until the end of the race, but not  significantly. the mean relative volume changes of the different tissue compartments at last  measurement compared to start were: tv -9.5% (se 1.5%), tsv -9.4% (se 1.5%), tvv - 10.0% (se 1.4%), tat -41.3% (se 2.3%), sast -48.7% (se 2.8%), vat -64.5% (se  4.6%), iaat -67.3% (se 4.3%), mat –41.5% (se 7.1%), tlt -1.2% (se 1.0%), slt -1.4%  (se 1.1%). before start and at early phase of tefr09 the non-finisher group had significantly  more percentage volume of tvv, tat, sast and vat compared to finisher. vat  correlates significantly with prerace training volume and intensity one year before the race  and with 50km- and 24hrs-race records. neither prerace body composition nor specific tissue  compartment volume changes showed a significant relationship to performance in the last two  thirds of tefr09.    conclusions. with this mobile mri field study the complex changes of body composition  during a multistage ultramarathon could be demonstrated in detail in a new and differentiated  way. participants lost more than the half of their adipose tissue. even lean tissue volume  (mainly skeletal muscle tissue) decreased due to the unpreventable chronic negative energy  balance during the race. vat shows the fastest and highest decrease compared to sast and  lean tissue compartments during the race. it seems to be the most sensitive morphometric  parameter regarding the risk of non-finishing a transcontinental footrace and shows a direct  relationship to pre-race-performance. however, body volume or body mass and therefore fat  volume has no correlation with total race performances of ultra-athletes finishing a 4500km  multistage race.    key words: magnetic resonance imaging; mri; body mass; body volume; body composition;  running; marathon; ultramarathon; performance; adipose tissue; body fat; lean tissue; visceral;  somatic; topography; segmentation; mapping    


3    introduction    with the worldwide growing number of people running, endurance sports have experienced  differentiation into multiple (sub-) disciplines in the last decades. concerning distance run,  the ultramarathon (um) seems to be the greatest challenge in endurance running. the german  ultramarathon association (duv) defines footraces of 50 km or longer as um. however, as  in every field of human physical activities, some people try to push themselves to the limits  and beyond. for these ultra-athletes a multistage ultramarathon (msum) is the ultimate test  of endurance performance. sometimes, the worldwide small group of ultra-endurance runners  meets each other trying to achieve the impossible: finishing a multistage transcontinental  footrace over thousands of kilometers. these most extreme multistage endurance  competitions in the world take the runner to a different level, where nutrition, sleep, energy  and psychological states have to be carefully managed. besides a few case reports, nearly  nothing has been reported about the medical aspects of runners doing a transcontinental  extended msum over several weeks [1]. until now, there have been no series published  regarding um running over more than 1,500 km. however, prolonged ultra-endurance  footraces offer the best opportunity to study physical adaptations and the relationships of the  physiological parameters in endurance athletes.  the transeurope footrace project (tefr-project) [2] was the first observational cohort field  study of a transcontinental msum, the transeurope footrace 2009 (tefr09) [3]. a unique  collective of 67 endurance runners (mean age 50.7 yrs., sd 10.5 yrs., range 26-74 yrs., m 56  (83.6%)) met the challenge and tried to cross 6 countries when running 4486 km in 64 stages  (mean 70.1 km, min 44 km, max 95.1 km) without any day rest [4]. the central aspect of  tefr-project was the usage of a mobile magnetic resonance imaging (mri) scanner  accompanying the tefr09 participants on a truck trailer over 64 days under their “natural”  conditions [2].  one focus of this presentation is on the descriptive presentation of characteristics and changes  in body composition during tefr09 in a new way differentiating between somatic and  visceral and segmental volumes of defined fat and lean tissue compartments measured by  continuous mobile whole body mri. in addition, possible associations of body volume  composition and prerace and race performance were analyzed to test the following  hypotheses: it is hypothesized, that prerace endurance running performance is related to  specific body fat and lean tissue composition in ultra-athletes. secondary it`s supposed, that  although the running distance of a transcontinental um cannot be trained concerning the  running volume (km), participants need specific prerace performance skills and fat and lean  tissue volume distribution, if they want to finish such a race. due to the expected huge energy  burden a transcontinental footrace without any day rest implicates, another assumption is that  it is mandatory for every participant to lose body mass and total body volume (tv) due to  massive adipose tissue decrease and more or less lean tissue catabolism. at least, with the  continuous differentiated measurement of body tissue compartments throughout the entire  tefr09, it should be shown indirectly, that although the participants are preselected in regard  to their ultra endurance running expertise, they will develop further economical adaptations as  the 4500 km race progresses.     material and methods    subjects. every tefr09 participant was asked to join the tefr-project, which was  approved by the local ethics committee of the university hospital of ulm (uhu, no.:  270/08-ubb/se) in accordance to the declaration of helsinki, regarding the study design, risk  management plan and individual protocols [2]. forty-four participants (67%) could be  recruited for the study and gave their informed written consent. every second subject (n=22, 


4    male 20, mean age 49.1 yrs., sd 11.5 yrs., range 27-69 yrs.) was randomly selected for whole  body mri measurements regarding body composition. according to project protocol these  subjects underwent a whole body mri before start at bari (south italy), and during the race in  measurement intervals of approximately 800 km. due to various reasons, deviations from  planned measurement intervals (mi: t0-t6) occurred. mean deviation of actual from planned  measurement intervals was 187.8 km (sd=141.3 km) [2].     prerace performance. before the start of tefr09 all subjects filled out specific  questionnaires concerning their prerace experience in endurance running. this request of  history includes the years of regular endurance running (pry), the number of finished (nf)  marathons (m), um and msum, and the prerace records (prr) for marathon and specific  um (50 km, 100 km, 6 hrs, 12 hrs, 24 hrs) races within the last decade before tefr. it also  includes the extent of prerace training (prt) 16 months before tefr09: training volume  (vol: km/week), training duration (time: hrs/week) and the training intensity (int: km/h). the  self-disclosures about nf and prr were cross checked with the archive of the duv and  discrepancies were clarified. however, for prt and pry we had to rely solely on the self- disclosures; these could not be compared with any official lists.    body composition analysis. different techniques for quantification of body fat are described  and more or less commonly used in literature: in vivo, two-compartment model methods are  the hydrodensitometry [5] and the body fat percentage and muscle mass calculation from  anthropometric data like skinfold thickness (sf) calipometry or/and segmental body  circumferences (cf) [6,7,8]. three-compartment methods are the bioelectrical impedance  analysis (bia) [9] and the dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (dexa) [10]. with these  methods indirect measurement, approximated calculation or simple estimation of total,  regional or local adipose or lean tissue [11,12,13,14] is possible. in contrast, a whole body  mri assessment of adipose tissue as a multi-compartment method is the only method  enabling exact topographic tissue mapping and tissue segmentation. therefore, it is the gold  standard imaging tool for differentiated assessment of adipose or lean tissue distribution in the  body [15,16,17,18].   subjects who finished tefr09 got whole body mri six times during tefr09 (7  measurements in total). body mass (bm) weightening was done at the same time as mri and  every 4th day: bia balance tanita bc-545 to the nearest 0.1 kg (tanita, arlington heights,  il, u.s.a.). body height was measured with a wall-mounted stadiometer (to the nearest 5  mm, standing barefoot) and body mass index (bmi) could be calculated.    mobile whole body mri. for whole body magnetic resonance (mr) measurements a 1.5  tesla mri scanner (magnetom avantotm, siemens ltd., erlangen, germany) mounted on a  mobile unit (mri-trailer, smit mobile equipment b.v., great britain) was used. the total  45 tonnes of equipment (mri-trailer, truck tractor, external 105kva diesel-generator, and  material van) was built up and down daily at each stopover of tefr09, requiring daily checks  and support of all technical systems [2].  several mri techniques have been described for measurement and quantification of body fat  composition: t1-weighted imaging by spin-echo or gradient-echo techniques [14,16,19],  chemical shift selective (chess) imaging [20,21,22], or dixon-techniques [23,24]. all of  them have specific advantages and disadvantages, the details of which are beyond the scope  of this article. for analysis of body composition a standardized assessment of whole body  adipose tissue measurement based on a mri protocol according to machann et al [25] was  used: a 2d t1-weighted turbo spin echo sequence with an echo train length of 7 was applied  (siemens ltd.). measurement parameters were set to be: flip angle 180°, echo time 12 ms,  repetition time 490 ms, slice thickness 10mm, slice distance 10mm, 5 slices per sequence, 


5    field of view 1991 cm², matrix size 256 x 196 was recorded in a measuring time of 12 seconds  (allowing breath holding examinations in the trunk area), bandwidth 120 hz/pixel. 90-120  images were generated, depending on the size of the subject. total examination time was  between 20 and 25 minutes including one rearrangement of prone positioned subject (head  forward and arms extended for upper body, feet forward for lower body), as total table feed of  the mr-imager is limited to 110 cm. in order to guarantee identical slice positions after  repositioning, the subjects were marked at the iliac crest. a body coil was used.    image post-processing. for topographic tissue segmentation and mapping of the athletes  body a fuzzy c-means algorithm according to würslin et al [26] was used. this approach  provides a simple and time-saving strategy for assessment and standardization of individual  adipose tissue distribution in the entire body. due to standardization using defined internal  markers it enables a completely automatic, reliable analysis and creation of adipose tissue  distribution profiles of the whole body from the multislice mr datasets and makes a reliable  comparison of subjects with different body structure possible [25,26].   signal of intestinal content with short t1can be interpreted as visceral adipose tissue (vat)  in absence of intraluminal gastroenteric nutrition fat (inf). if scanned subject is in a non- fasting condition, the visceral t1 signal occurs from both, vat and inf. reliability (mean  absolute deviation of three repeated measurements) is noted with 3.08% for total volume  (tv), 1.48% for total adipose tissue (tat) and 1.13% for visceral adipose tissue (vat) [26].   due to their immense mental and physical stress caused by the daily ultra-endurance burden,  the runners’ biggest fear was to lose too much energy in progress of tefr09. their primary  effort after stage finishing was to get as much nutrition and calories as possible before falling  asleep. therefore, it was not always possible to ensure fasting conditions of the subjects for  mobile mri measurements. some subjects were motivated enough to do mr examination  directly after the daily stage before eating in a fasting but exhausted condition, so they  sometimes were not able to lie absolutely still on mr table and follow the breath commands  exactly. these specific circumstances resulted in an image post-processing analysis being less  automated than mentioned by machann and würslin [25,26]: movement artifacts had to be  cleared manually more often before automatic post-processing. compared to normal or  overweight patients, in thin and lean bodies the amount of adipose bone marrow (abm) and  inf is more relevant in relation to whole body adipose and lean tissue: at start of tefr09,  abm and inf together account for 13.2% of total adipose tissue. due to continuous loss of  adipose body tissue, this ratio rises up to 28.2% till the end of race. for visceral adipose  tissue, the account for inf rises from 3% at start up to 65.4% at the end of tefr09.  therefore, a manual separation of abm (figure 1) and inf (figure 2) was done on all mr  slices of the subjects. looking at mean differences würslin et al [26] calculated between  manual tissue segmentation and their automatic procedure (2.07% for tv, 8.13% for tat,  3.21% for vat), the described additional manual corrections regarding the small volumes of  abm and inf are appropriate.  after these procedures a specific and extensive topographic mapping and segmentation of  body tissue was possible (table 1): tv can be subdivided in total somatic volume (tsv) and  total visceral volume (tvv, figure 2) or can be subdivided in total adipose tissue (tat;  without inf) and total lean tissue (tlt). tlt can be separated in somatic (slt) and visceral  lean tissue (vlt). subtraction of abm from tat leads to total adipose soft tissue (tast).  tast can be subdivided in vat and somatic adipose soft tissue (sast). therefore, somatic  adipose tissue (sat, figure 1) is the same as sast plus abm or tat minus vat,  respectively. vat can be subdivided in intraabdominal (retro- and intraperitoneal) adipose  tissue (iaat) and intrathoracic, mainly mediastinal adipose tissue (mat). body  segmentation was done into upper extremities (ue), trunk (tr) and lower extremities (le).  total volume (tv), lean tissue (lt) and adipose soft tissue (ast) volume was calculated for 


6    the upper and lower extremities (ue and le) and for the trunk (tr), additionally: for  nomenclature of specific segmented tissues see table 1.    statistical analysis. for data elaboration specific software were used: microsofttm office  exceltm (release 12.0.6665.5003, microsoft home and student suite, 2007, microsoft inc.)  for data documentation, spss (ibmtm spsstm statistics, release 19.0.0, 2010, spss inc.)  for statistical analysis and sigmaplot for windows version 11.0 (release 11.2.0.5, 2008,  systat software inc.,) for graphical data presentation.  the measured volumes of tissue compartments are presented as percentage volumes [vol%]  and as absolute [l] and relative differences [%] to start. for every measurement interval (t0 –  t5) the dispersion measures are presented graphically in box plot figures (median, 25th/75th- percentile, 10th/90th percentile and all outliers) for all subjects (finishers and non-finishers)  and location measures (mean and standard error, se) are present graphically in line figures for  finishers only. calculated total changes (t5 vs. t0) of volumes and volume percentages are  presented in text as means and standard deviation (sd) with minimum (min) and maximum  (max) as appropriate.  analyses on volume changes duringtefr09. for analysis on significance regarding  volume changes of the specific tissue compartments during tefr09, a univariate variance  analysis (anova) for repeated measurements was preferred (only subjects who got the  whole body mri at every measurement interval (t0-t5): n=12). therefore, a common linear  model for repeated measurements (with post hoc analysis on significance between the  different times of measurement) was chosen. for correction of accumulation of the alpha  niveau due to multiple testing (of hypothesis: “the means at stage intervals are significant  different to means at start”), the bonferroni-procedure for confidence-interval (ci) adaption  was applied. for the univariate anova model, one precondition, the sphericity of data  (homogenity between the variance of differences of two measurements) is necessary, and was  proven by the mauchly-test. because of the small number of subjects, the power of mauchly- test regarding sphericity is low. therefore, the “greenhouse-geisser” (spss) correction  procedure was used. looking at result reliability and test power, in cases of severe injury of  the sphericity assumption, a multivariate anova test was used. in cases of missing values,  the specific dependent variable (specific tissue compartment) was excluded from anova  analysis.   analyses on difference. for dependence analysis including all stages of and total tefr09,  analyses on difference between the dichotomous nominally scaled dependent variables of the  sample finishing status (finisher/non-finisher: f/nf) regarding pre-race running performance  history and regarding total, lean and adipose tissue volumes were done. depending on normal  or free distribution of the independent interval scaled variables, the parametric independent t- test (variance homogeneity was calculated with levene`s test) or nonparametric mann- whitney-u-test was used. due to the higher power in small cohorts, the shapiro-wilk [27,28]  test (and not the kolmogorov-smirnov statistic [29]) was used to check for normal of  distribution of the independent pre-race variables of performance (pry, prt, prr),   analysis on relationship. for analyses on relationships the pearson correlation coefficient  (ccp) and spearman-rho correlation coefficient (ccs) were calculated for parametric and  non-parametric parameters, respectively, with using bivariate (two-sided) or univariate (one- sided) testing as appropriate:  − bm vs. tv and its distribution throughout the race: bivariate ccs  − prerace performance vs. percentage total, lean and adipose volumes: univariate ccs / ccp  − race performance vs. percentage total, lean and adipose volumes: univariate ccp    for interpretation of cc-values the effect size according to cohen (r=1: low, r=3: medium,  r=5: high) was used [30]. for all tests alpha level (p-value) of 0.05 was used to indicate 


7    significance.     results    casuistry. figure 3 shows the topographical mapping of changes of lean and adipose tissue  of a subject (male, 32 yrs, finisher) with one of the largest decreases of sast and vat  during tefr09. runners often had discomfort or pain after stage finishing, so the  investigators tried to adapt body positioning in the mr scanner to the athletes’ current  problems to make it as comfortable as possible for them. therefore, a reliable and strictly  standardized lying position on mri table was not possible at each time of measurement.  sometimes knees or elbows were positioned more or less straightened. this explains the  sometimes visible but small topographical phase shifting between different times of  measurement in figure 3.     tv vs. bm/bmi. the absolute volumes of all investigated body tissue compartments and  segments are shown in table 2. over all subjects, mean loss of bm and bmi at the end of the  race was 5.23 kg (sd 3.72 kg) and 1.49 kg/m² (sd 1.18 kg/m²), respectively (table 3). there  was a high correlation (ccs: 0.978, p<0.001) between bm [kg] and tv [l] regarding mean  absolute value changes throughout the race (figure 4).    percentage body composition. at start of tefr09, the mean percentage volume of tsv was  84.8 (sd 1.36 vol.%). tsv could be differentiated into mean slt 65.0 vol% (sd 5.33 vol%),  mean abm 3.2 vol% (sd 0.89 vol%) and mean sast 16.6 vol% (sd 5.58 vol%). the mean  tvv of 15.2 vol% (sd 1.36 vol%) is consistent and splits in mean vlt 12.3 vol% (sd 1.23  vol%) and mean vat 2.9 vol% (sd 1.37 vol%). from these data the changes of mean  volumes percentages of tissue compartments regarding the overall population of ultra-runners  could be calculated for transcontinental msum races (figure 5).    total volumes. percentage volumes changes of tsv and tvv were not significant (table 3,  figure 6). but for absolute volumes (tv, tsv, tvv), a significant change could be evaluated  with a very high test power (table 4). except tsv at first mi, significant decreases for tv,  tsv and tvv could be shown at all mi throughout tefr09 (figure 7). paired comparison of  mi after start showed no significant difference for tvv but partial differences for tv and  tsv (figure 7).  tv. after more than 4000 km of running the mean tv showed a mean decrease of 9.5% (sd  5.1%, min -2.7%, max -17.9%) compared to start. depending on the total sample the mean  tv decrease for overall population of ultra-runners ranges between 8 to 11% (se 1.5%); see  figure 9. looking only at the group of finishers, the absolute amount of tv loss in mean at the  last mi was 6.1 l (sd 3.4 l, min -2.5 l, max -12.6 l) (figure 10). mean loss of tv per km was  3.5 ml (sd 2.9 ml/km) in the beginning and got smaller like a reversed parabolic function  during tefr09 down to 1.5 ml/km (sd 0.8 ml/km) at the end of the race (figure 11).  tsv. relative decrease of tsv during tefr09 showed a nearly similar curve as tv (figure  9), but was less pronounced (mean -9.4% after more than 4000 km, sd 5.3%, min -2.1%, max  -18.1%) with the same se of 1.5%. for the finisher group the absolute loss of tsv increased  to 5.2 l in mean (sd 3.0 l, min -1.7 l, max -11.1 l) at the end of race (figure 10). this is  consistent with a mean tsv loss of 1.3 ml/km (sd -0.7ml/km) at the end of tefr09, starting  with 2.7 ml/km (sd 2.7 ml/km) in first 8 stages of tefr09 (figure 11).  tvv. compared to tv and tsv, the relative decrease of tvv occurred much faster but  ended in nearly similar amount with a mean of 10.0% (sd 4.9%, min -3.8%, max -19.3%) in  a negative parabolic graph shape (see figure 9). the mean loss of absolute tvv was 0.9 l (sd  0.5 l, min -0.3 l, max -1.7 l) for finishers (figure 10). mean absolute tvv loss per km during 


8    tefr09 had a maximum of 0.75 ml/km (sd 0.5 ml/km) at the beginning and 0.2 ml/km (sd  0.1 ml/km) at the end (figure 11).    adipose tissue. for adipose tissue, in total (tat), somatic (sast) and visceral (vat), a  significant change of absolute volumes (table 4) and percentage volumes (table 3) could be  evaluated with a very high test power at the different mi during tefr09. significant decrease  for tat, sast and vat could be shown at all mi throughout tefr09 compared to start and  for tat and sast compared to first mi after start (stage 5 to 12) (figure 8). for other mi the  paired comparison showed no significant change.  tat. a continuous decrease of tat occurred and ended in a relative mean loss of 41.3%  (sd 8.0%, min -25.4%, max -53.2%) with a small se of 2.3% (figure 9) at last mi. looking  at absolute loss of tat, a finisher lost 5.3 l in mean (sd 2.6 l, min -2.7 l, max -9.8 l) until the  end of race (figure 10). mean tat loss per km in finishers was 3.2 ml (sd -1.7 ml/km) at the  beginning and 1.2 ml (sd 0.6 ml/km) at the end of tefr09 (figure 11).  sast. relative sast decrease compared to start showed a steeper graph than tat and  ended in a mean loss of 48.7% (sd 9.9%, min -25.9%, max -65.5%) after more than 4000 km  (figure 9). absolute sast decrease in finishers showed a mean of 4.4 l (sd 2.2 l, min -2.2 l,  max -8.4 l) at the end of tefr09 (figure 10). this corresponds to a mean loss of sast of 1.1  ml/km (sd 0.5 ml/km) at the end of tefr09 compared to 2.4 ml/km (sd 1.4 ml/km) at the  start (figure 11).  vat. the relative decrease of vat occurred much more rapidly in mean and ended in a  relative vat volume loss of 64.5% (sd 15.9%, min -27.7%, max -88.8 %) at the end (figure  9) compared to start and a se up to 4.6%. percentage volume of vat decreased more quickly  and severely compared to absolute vat volume (figure 12). in absolute values, this rapid and  continuous loss of vat ended in a mean of -0.9 l (sd 0.5 l, min -0.3 l, max -1.7 l) in the  finisher group (figure 10), which was nearly the same as absolute tvv loss. therefore, the  mean vat volume loss per km was the same as for tvv in finishers (figure 11).  the subdivision of vat in iaat and mat shows, that iaat decreased a bit faster than  vat in total and ended in a relative volume loss 67.3% (sd 14.8%, min -31.7%, max - 88.8%) at the end (figure 13). mat initially decreased as rapid as iaat resp. vat but  reached a plateau of 30% volume loss after nearly 1000 km of running before it decreased  again in the last third of the race up to 41.5% with a larger variance (sd 24.7%, min -0.1 %,  max -89.0 %).    lean tissue. due to significant and continuous loss of different adipose tissue volumes the  percentage volume of tlt, slt and vlt increased during tefr09 significantly without  relevant changes in absolute volumes, respectively (table 3, figure 12); analysis of means of  absolute volume showed no significant changes for total, somatic and visceral lean tissue at  the different mi during tefr09 (table 4).   tlt, slt, vlt. tlt volume showed undulating relative changes duringtefr09 in mean  compared to start. just at the end after more than 4000 km running the mean relative changes  were -1.2% tlt (sd 3.3%, min 6.3%, max -5.5%) with an se of 1.0% (figure 9). due to  nearly stable volume regarding vlt during tefr09, slt showed similar data during  tefr09 like tlt relative to start: mean -1.4% (sd 3.9%, min 7.5%, max -6.6%). not every  finisher showed a decrease of absolute tlt and slt, some of them showed increases, some  decreases: mean -0.9 l (sd 1.2 l, min 1.1 l, max -2.8 l); see figure 10. mean loss of tlt and  slt per km changed between 0.3 and 0.2 ml with a wide range (sd at beginning 1.9 ml/km,  at the end 0.3 ml/km), see figure 11.     segmental volume analysis. significance of volume changes in the different body segments  is shown in table 5: for the lower extremities the change of volumes was only significant for 


9    sast_le but not for tv_le and lt_le; for the trunk and upper extremities decreases were  significant for adipose soft tissue volume (sast_tr, sast_ue) and total volume (tv_tr,  tv_ue) but not for lean tissue volume (lt_tr, lt_ue). most decrease of somatic adipose  tissue occurred in the trunk (t5: mean -50,3%, sd 12,0%), followed by the arms (t5:mean - 39,1%, sd 8,3%); in the legs the adipose tissue lost was the smallest, but significant (t5: mean  -29,2%, sd 13,4%), figure 14. although, changes of lean tissue were not significant in any  segment, mean values demonstrate a mean increase in the legs in the first half of tefr09,  and in the trunk in the first third of the race, while in the arms lean tissue loss was detectable  already at the first mi t1 (figure 14).    finisher/non-finisher. 45.5% of the subjects did not finish the race. dropout rate of subjects  compared to all race participants is shown in figure 15. the main reason (70%, ni=7) for  premature dropping out of the race was intolerable pain progress in the legs due to overload of  muscle and tendons (soft tissues) leading to intermuscular and peritendinous inflammation  (fasciitis): lower legs (40%), upper legs (30%). other reasons were a high tibial stress  fracture, a painful bunion and one rapidly progressing phlegmonia from thumb up to the  forearm needing immediate surgical intervention.  figure 16 shows distribution of percentage volumes for all tissue compartments at time of  start (t0) and mi t1 (317-789 km) for finishers (nf=12) and non-finishers (nnf=10) of  tefr09. at both times the finisher group had significantly more percentage volume  regarding total somatic tissue (mean tsv) than non-finishers of tefr09 (at t0 +1.8%: 85.5  vol% vs. 84.0 vol%, at t1 +1.6%: 85.8% vs. 84.4%) and therefore significantly less  percentage volume of mean tvv (at t0 -10.5%: 14.5 vol% vs. 16.0 vol%, at t1 -9.5%: 14.2  vol% vs. 15.6 vol%), table 6. the finisher group showed significant less adipose tissue  volume percentage than non-finisher for tat and vat at t0 and t1, and also for sast at t1  (table 6): at start, non-finishers had 71.5% more vat volume percent (mean vat at t0: 2.2  vol% vs. 3.8 vol%), 28.0% more sast volume percent (mean sast at t0: 15.0 vol% vs. 19.2  vol%) and in total 26.6% more tat volume percent (mean tat at t0: 20.6 vol% vs. 26.1  vol%) than finishers (table 6). at first mi t1the difference between finisher and non-finisher  was significant further on: non-finishers had 96.8% more vat volume percent (mean vat at  t0: 1.6 vol% vs. 3.2 vol%), 39.7% more sast volume percent (mean sast at t0: 13.3 vol%  vs. 18.5 vol%) and in total 34.9% more tat volume percent (mean tat at t0: 18.3 vol% vs.  24.7 vol%) than finishers (table 6). these differences for adipose tissue compartments were  not detectable any more in the further racing run (t2-t5): either there are not enough numbers  to treat in the group of non-finishers for further analysis on difference to finishers or no  difference could be shown. conversely, lean tissue difference of percentage volume was  significant smaller in non-finisher compared to finisher for tlt (at t0: -6.9%, at t1: -7.8%)  and slt (at t0: -8,1%, at t1: -8.9%) (table 6). vlt showed no significant difference between  finisher and non-finisher at any mi (t0-t5). table 7 and figure 17 demonstrate a significant  relative volume loss at mi t1 and t2 compared to start only for sast and no other tissue  compartment.    prerace-performance. although there is a wide range of finished long distance foot races in  the subjects group (table 8), every participant of tefr09 had already finished nearly one um  and msum, but not every subjects had finished a single marathon. the endurance training  extent one year and 3 months before tefr09 varied also for training volume [km], time [h]  and intensity [km/h] in the subject group (table 8). for number of finished marathons, um  and msum no difference between finisher and non-finisher could be evaluated (table 9). but  regarding prerace training volume and intensity one year before tefr09 and their 50km- and  24hr-race record, finishers had a significant higher prerace-performance compared to non- finishers (table 9). only these five prerace-performance parameters (prtvol08/09, prtint08, 


10    prr50km, prr24hr) showed also a mainly high and medium correlation with volume  percentage of adipose tissue compartments (vat, sast, tat), tlt and slt (figure 18).  race-performance. no relevant correlation between percentage fat and lean volumes of  different compartments at start and race performances of subjects at tefr09 could be  detected (figure 19). for sast at the beginning of tefr09 (stage 1 to 8) a significant  correlation between percentage volume at start and cumulative performance is given, but only  on a medium to low effect size. for tat, tlt and slt significance for such a correlation is  shown at the first 12 to 15 stages and at the last third of tefr09 on a medium effect size  (figure 19). correlation of percentage fat and lean volumes to performances at individual  stages can only be shown for very few stages on middle to low effect size. for none of the  investigated volumes the relative changes duringtefr09 show a significant correlation to  performance.    discussion    nearly nothing is known about the influence of endurance burden on the specific changes of  body composition regarding distribution of adipose and lean tissues in somatic and visceral  compartments and in the body segments. field studies on this topic mostly use methods which  only allow indirect measurements and approximated calculations or simple estimations of  total or local adipose or lean tissue proportions [11,12,13,14]. for tat and subcutaneous  adipose tissue (scat = sast without intermuscular adipose tissue (imat) [31]), some of  these indirect methods show more or less correlation to mri findings [17]. these methods are  not able to predict the amount of visceral (vat) or somatic adipose tissue (sat) in the body  [16,32]. being the first investigation in endurance field studies using the gold standard  method [18] whole body mri for such analyses, our results showed new data on volume  changes of fat and lean tissue in these different parts of the athlete`s body.    age and gender related differences. bale et al [33]found lower percentage body fat in  female elite marathon runners. in obese patients (bmi >27 kg/m²) machann et al [25] found  correlation of amount and distribution of adipose tissue to age (vat increasing with age) and  to gender (%sat female > male, %vat male > female).but they found no consistent  differences in tat profiles between the selected age groups for both females (n=40, mean  age 45 yrs., sd 12 yrs., range 23-64 yrs.) and males (n=40, mean age 45yrs, sd 12 yrs., range  24-65 yrs.) in their collective. naturally, our collective of ultra-runners with comparable age  distribution (n=22, mean age 49 yrs., sd 12 yrs., range 27-69 yrs.) showed a very low  absolute mean volume of vat at start of tefr09 (female: 0.5 l, males 1.8 l) compared to  obese patients (females 1.5 – 4 l, males 4-6.8 l) [25]. statistical analysis on gender related  differences was not possible (only 2 females) in our collective, but even these data indicate  that a difference in vat between male and female is not only visible in obese people, but is  also visible in thin ultra-endurance athletes. analysis on age showed no correlation to fat  distribution at start (tat, sast, vat) or to volume changes of lean and adipose tissue  during tefr09.    changes in body composition. different effects of endurance performances on body  composition are described in literature. beyond dispute is the fact that endurance performance  leads to a decrease of body mass, mainly body fat. body fat is the main energy-rich substrate  for endurance performance [34,35,36,37]. therefore, endurance exercise leads to a reduction  of subcutaneous tissue as demonstrated in several field studies [34,36,38].   but specific influence on the energy turnover seems to depend on the type of endurance  burden [1,39]. in general, non-stop ultra-endurance races over hours, days or weeks without a  break result in a decrease in body mass [1,36,40,41] where body fat as well as skeletal muscle 


11    seems to decrease [1,36,40,41,42]. in ultra-endurance performances with defined breaks body  mass may remains stable [43,44,45] or even increase [34] and body fat is reduced [34,46,47],  whereas skeletal muscle mass seems to be spared [35,43,47] or may even increase [46]. our  whole body mri results show comparable results for an ultra-long msum over 64 days  without any day rest: every subject decreased in bm(i), tv, tsv, and tvv due to massive  loss of tat, sat and vat, respectively. not every runner lost tlt and slt during the  tefr09some of them showed increases, some decreases. knechtle at al. found the same  individual differences for lean tissue in ultra runners during a 1200 km msum across  germany [48]. if there are not sufficiently long breaks in ultra-endurance races, some  participants might not find enough time for regeneration and restoration of their energy depots  before the next stage. with progression of the race this is leading to implementation of muscle  tissue for energy provision.  mass loss. raschka and plat a mean loss of 1.75 kg body mass in an ultra-endurance run over  1000 km within 20 days [34]. in their investigation, there was a statistically significant  decrease in body mass after day 8 until day 11, which then remained stable until the finish. in  another investigation on 10 ultra runners (bia) the mean loss of bm after a 1200 km footrace  was also not significant, but the loss of 3.9 kg fat mass was [48]. unfortunately authors gave  no information about relative changes of fat and lean body mass. our results determine, that a  transcontinental ultra-long msum of 64 stages leads to a significant three times higher loss of  body volume (9.5%) than published for body mass loss in deca-triathlons or 20 stages msum  [34,47].  the relation of water and lipid to the density of human adipose tissue ranges from 0.925 to  0.97 kg/l [49]. assuming the middle (0.948 g/l), in our investigation the ultra-athletes lost a  total fat mass (tat) of 4.8 kg in mean (sast 4.0 kg, vat 0.8 kg), resembling the main part  (91.8%) of body mass loss of 5.2kg. the lean tissue of the human body has a higher density  than adipose tissue and muscle tissue (range 1.05 to 1.06 g/l) and varies with age [49,50],  ranging between 1.10 and 1.11 g/l [51,52]. with these data and knowing the mean relative  reduction of tlt (1.2%), the mean loss of lean body mass can be calculated about -0.67 kg at  the end of tefr09 in our subject group.  vat. mediastino-abdominal lipomatosis is described as being associated with exertional  dyspnoe [65], non–insulin-dependent diabetes, type iv hyperlipidemia, and hyperuricemia.  the abdominal vat is an important independent risk factor for metabolic diseases in the  older patient [53] and there is evidence that mainly abdominal vat, which is  morphologically and functionally different from abdominal sast, is associated with  metabolic syndrome (insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, hypertension, obesity) and  hyperinsulinemia [54-59], as well as linked inflammatory diseases [60]. the real mean loss of  relative iaat while running a msum of nearly 4500 km, was more than two third compared  to start in our collective (figure 13). we showed that endurance running also has an direct  influence on intrathoracic fat, especially mat, which decreased up to more than 40% in mean  (figure 13). mat is associated with hypertension, obesity, and iatrogenic cushing syndrome  [56,61-64].   until now, a specific treatment for selective reduction of vat is not known [66] and as our  mr analyses showed that vat decreased much more rapidly and vigorously than sast  (figure 9), a very good and effective way of metabolic disease risk reduction is endurance  running. as vat decreases much faster and more than sast, our investigation indicates that  three-compartment measurement methods like sf-analyses and bia cannot give accurate  assumption or calculations for iaat and mat. even the results of the four-compartment  method cadaver study are false, when post mortem findings are transferred to physiological  effects which occur from long lasting running impact on fat and lean tissue in vivo [67].     f vs. nf. fifty-five percent (12) of the 22 ultra-runners treated with mobile whole body mri 


12    for this study reached the last measurement interval; 10 dropped out earlier. in contrast, the  dropout rate for all starters at tefr09 and all subjects taking part at tefr-project was 31%  [2]. reasons for dropping out of this transcontinental msum race were overuse reactions of  the musculoskeletal system of the lower extremities (80%, figure 15)., mainly concerning the  myotendinofascial system.  in a 17day msum (1200 km) knechtle et al found no differences between finishers and non- finishers regarding the anthropometric parameters body mass index, sf, cf, estimated  skeletal muscle mass (estimated from sf and cf) and percent body fat (bia) [68]. but with  whole body mri for differentiated body composition analysis, we found significant  difference between finishers and non-finishers between both, somatic and visceral volumes  and between adipose and lean tissue volumes at start and early beginning of the 4500 km  msum tefr09 (figure 16). out results indicate, that the risk of dropping out of such an  ultra-long transcontinental footrace is significant higher, when total body fat percentage is  more than 21-25% at start, in which the visceral fat percentage (vat) shows more higher  difference between finishers and non-finishers (71.5% in mean) than the somatic fat  compartment (sast: 28.0%). because vat is affected by endurance running burden most  fast and most hardest compared to somatic fat and other lean tissue (figure 9) and is highly  correlated with prerace performance regarding training volume and intensity and specific  ultramarathon race-performance (50km-race),our results indicate, that vat is the most  sensible predictor for the risk of non-finishing a transcontinental msum like tefr09. in  ultra-runners there is not a high sast or tat, if vat is low.   although training a distance of 4500 to 5000 km is not possible, participants of such  msum`s should acquire specific characteristics and levels regarding body composition and  performance skills even before the race if they want to have a good chance to finish: vat  nearby 20-21%, training volumes of more than 100 km/week one year before the race and the  performance intensity of 7.5 km/h in minimum allowing specific ultra-race records of less  than 5 hrs in 50km-races or more than 178 km in 24hr-races. in other words, if these levels of  prerace performances are reached for at least 15 months before the transcontinental race, the  vat (and sast; tat) as the sensible marker for specific body composition adaptation is  also in an optimal range for low risk of non-finishing, because these parameters correlate in a  mostly high level.  because the subjects mainly fall out of the race due to overuse injuries in the  myotendinofascial system of the lower extremities we tend to assume, that the mentioned  interdependent parameters of body composition and prerace ultra-running performance, led to  overuse injuries in the main stressed musculoskeletal organs, if they are not highly adapted as  mentioned above: too less specific ultra endurance adaption and too much of vat (and  sast) implements high risk of severe soft tissue overuse in the legs and mostly happens in  the early phase (figure 15) of a transcontinental foot race.  but nearly every starter of tefr09 showed more or less often overuse soft tissue problems of  the myotendofascial structures of the legs during the race, but the feet are not a region for  problems for experienced endurance runners in a msum [69]. so the immense amount of  mechanical stress on the musculoskeletal system when running nearly two marathons daily  over a period of 9 weeks can lead to these overuse syndromes without obligatory necessity of  prevalent (intrinsic) factors like “overweight” (high vat), suboptimal ultra-endurance pre- race performance or mal-alignment of the legs (which was only seen in one female subject  suffering from a bunion). the majority of the participants was able to “overrun” more or less  severe overuse soft tissue syndromes in the legs and reached the finish line [2]. this indicates,  that despite the mentioned somatic parameters other mentally based factors like pain  resistance and personality traits are also relevant for finishing or non-finishing a  transcontinental footrace [70]. one subject (male, 61 yrs.) has to stop the race after stage 38  (2.601 km run) due to a high tibial stress fracture which was detected in specific mri at this 


13    day (figure 15). the astonishing is not the stress fracture, because this can happen to every  ultra runner when starting at a transcontinental race, but the fact that the major pain and  massive performance (running velocity) loss started at stage 36 already. this subject ran 228  km (3 stages) with a complete high tibial fracture before stopping the race, because he  interpreted the pain as a soft tissue injury due to overuse and tried to ‘overrun’ it before he  asked for mri control. another participant (female, 46 yrs.) showed the same behavior when  running 208 km (stage 46 to 48) with a ventral pelvic ring stress fracture before diagnosis  could be done with mobile mri [2]. these examples and our prerace test on pain tolerance  demonstrate that the resilience of the ultra athletes regarding pain is significantly higher than  in a normal control group [70].    body composition and performance. in specific treadmill investigations under laboratory  settings, millet et al showed that a good single ultra-marathon performance needs specific  running economy depending on ability of maximal oxygen uptake being highly correlated to  citrate synthase activity and capillary network [71]. but these physiological factors are not  investigated directly under race conditions in ultra-endurance events till now. concerning this  matter, only indirect parameters like anthropometric characteristics are examined.   several anthropometric factors are reported to affect performance in runners, but the  presented data are inconsistent and often contradictory. such differences are also present in  the specific literature regarding anthropometrical predictors of performance outcome in ultra- marathons. several reasons are responsible for this. the numbers of volunteers are different,  and in most reports they are limited and differ in gender and ethnic origin. furthermore, the  investigations are based on manifold different types of um races. they can differ in the  distance of running and number of stages, but also in altitude and/or external conditions.   anthropometric parameters related to good performance are different in marathons and  middle distance (half-marathon, 10km) events [72]. knechtle et al reported that  anthropometry is not associated with performance in single, mono-stage um races (24 hrs  [73]).  in msum knechtle et al found no correlation between bm or body fat (bia) and race  performance in a 17-stage msum (“deutschlandlauf 2007”: 1200 km) [68]. in a cohort of  392 athletes, hoffman found a significant relationship of bmi to finishing times in mono- stage um running (161 km um) [74]. in single marathon runner abdominal and front thigh  sf are correlated [75]. the sum of eight sf-locations correlated significantly to 100 km race- time in a survey of 3 races of knechtle et al [76].  according to our results with a collective of 22 subjects and using gold standard whole body  mri, in athletes taking part at a 64-days msum there are no relevant correlations between  total volume, percentage fat and lean volumes of different compartments at start and total race  performances of subjects at tefr09. for sast a significant correlation between percentage  volume at start and cumulative performance is given at the beginning of tefr09 (stages 1 to  8), but only on a medium to low effect size. correlation of percentage fat and lean volumes to  performances at individual stages could only be shown in a few stages on middle to low effect  size. looking at percentage volume distribution the participants already started with a low  percentage of body fat. therefore, our results might confirm earlier findings of a negative  relationship between subcutaneous fat tissue amount (thickness or volume), being the main fat  tissue compartment of the body, and performance in single or multiday ultramarathon races.  but in a multistage ultramarathon over thousands of kilometers we found no relationship  between body fat percentage or bm or bv and race performance using specific whole body  mri, like knechtle et al did with bia [68]. the majority of transcontinental msum  participants ran not for winning but for finishing the race, therefore running velocity had only  a priority for a few of them. but for single um races, the race time and therefore the  performance plays a more important role for the ultra-athletes and body composition and fat 


14    distribution gets more significant influence, respectively.  similar interpretation has to be done, when looking at segmental (somatic) tissue changes in  the arm, legs and trunk during tefr09. like for adipose and lean total somatic and visceral  volumes (figure 19) we also did an analysis on relationship between segmental tissue volume  changes and race performance (results not demonstrated graphically) and detected only little  to low medium effect size for correlations between sast of all segments (ue, tr, le) with  cumulative race performance in first 8 stages of tefr09. so in our investigation, all  segments show similar significant relationship to race performance like sast over all (figure  19) without any exceptional segment findings, which explains the inconstant finding in  literature: knechtle et al [77] found an association between triceps sf thickness and  performance in female 100 km ultra-runners. tanaka and matsuura mentioned this for cf of  the thigh in the early eighties [78].  some ultra athletes show adaption to the intense running burden at tefr09 with muscle  (slt) increase in the legs, although they are already specialized on ultra running. these  findings were not significant in mean. for the trunk mean increase of slt could be detected  also within the first third of the race. this is explained by the gluteal and psoas muscles,  which are part of the active motor system of the lower extremities but anatomically are placed  in the trunk in our segmentation. all lean tissue segments showed a decrease of their volumes  towards the end of tefr09, indicating the high negative energy burden of transcontinental  running.    metabolic changes. after the first thousand kilometers the mean loss of tv per km, mainly  caused by sast and vat decrease, declined constantly up to more than half until the end of  race (figure 11). despite lack of documentation of the nutrition and caloric intake but  knowing that the subjects tried to ensure an optimum of energy intake the decrease of fat  volume loss can be explained by two reasons: relevant metabolic changes regarding energy  balancing [79] and improvement and optimization of running style during progression of the  race. not in multistage but in single stage ultra-running conditions such economical  adaptations are already shown by millet et al [80,81,82]. they could show significant changes  of running mechanics and spring-mass behavior towards a higher mean step frequency  (+4.9%) with shorter ground-feet contact time (-4.5%) and lower ground reaction force (- 4.4%) due to functional leg length decrease (-13%) and increase of leg (+9.9%) and vertical  stiffness (+8.6%) during the support phase of running between the early phase and the end of  a 24hrs treadmill run [80]. millet et al speculated that these changes in running mechanics are  contributed to the overall limitation of the potentially harmful consequences of such a long- duration run on subjects' musculoskeletal system. but transferred to msum conditions, such  changes of running mechanics may also be contributed to the necessity of the organism to  optimize the running economy to a high-end level ( as low energy consumption as possible)  due to the massive negative energy burden a transcontinental race implicates. the changes  millet et al [80] and other researchers had measured [83,84] describe a running technique  which requires only a low muscle power, because forceful eccentric load and step length are  reduced. besides the reduction of overuse risk for the musculoskeletal system this reduces the  energy demand the organism as well [85], even if the underlying mechanisms of relation  between energy cost of running and step variability remains unclear till now. if running  economy could not be sacrificed in ultramarathon [86,87] and the amount of running  mechanic changes depends on duration of running and distance towards a fatigue state,  respectively [81,85], it is even mandatory in transcontinental msum. every subject of tefr- project showed a significant loss of bm and tv throughout the race, independent from the  prerace overall status of body composition and performance or nutrition behavior in the race.  the massive negative energy burden of a 4500 km msum is indicated by the significant loss  of the grey matter in the brain, also [88]. the analysis of specific lab markers of the required 


15    blood and urine samples may give more data about the metabolic changes during tefr09 in  the nearby future.    limitations. there was no general or individual nutrition plan offered or generated for the  participants of tefr09 or subjects of tefr-project, respectively. the athletes got a breakfast  and a dinner served in different locations at the stage destinations, but these meals were  organized and oriented at the local conditions at the last minute. the food supply points  during the stages also offered daily changing products and the athletes take additional  individual food on their own throughout the way [2]. therefore, documentation and  measurement of nutrition and caloric intake was not really possible and a stringent  documentation of nutrition by the subjects implicated the risk of compliance problems.  whole body mobile mri protocols did not measure ectopic fat such as intracellular fat of  organs (e.g. liver) and muscles (imcl). for imcl measurement specific mobile 1h-mr- spectroscopy of muscles of the lower legs were implemented in tefr-project [2], but due to  the dependence of this mr-method on a stable external magnetic field around the magnetom,  the analysis of mobile1h-mr-spectroscopyduring tefr09 did not lead to valid data and  needed further development and implementation of post-imaging proof algorithms.    conclusions    with this mobile mri field study a complex change of body composition during an ultra-long  msum could be demonstrated in detail. iaat (vat) shows the fastest and highest decrease  compared to sast and lean tissue compartments during tefr09. participants lost more than  the half of their adipose soft tissue and even lean tissue volume decreased (mainly skeletal  muscle tissue) and without any exception, every subject showed a significant loss of body  volume. this indicates that running an msum of nearly 4500 km without any day rest is  linked with an unpreventable chronic negative energy balance due to the massive running  burden. the ratio of adipose tissue contribution between the visceral and somatic  compartments has a significant influence on dropping out of race during the first third in a  musm due to overuse injuries of the myotendinofascial system of the legs. but body volume  or body mass and therefore fat volume has no correlation with the performance of ultra- athletes finishing a 64-stage um. two- and three-compartment methods like bioelectrical  impedance analysers and skinfold-equations cannot give estimations about relationship  between visceral and somatic compartments and therefore cannot measure the most sensitive  anthropometric predictor of non-finishing a msum: vat. running economy is mandatory  for transcontinental msum races, and even in well trained ultra-athletes such events lead to  further adaption of running mechanics and to metabolic changes as performance analysis  compared to body composition changes throughout the race indicates.      financial disclosure. this work is supported in part by the german research association  (dfg: “deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft”), under grants schu 2514/1-1 and schu  2514/1-2. the funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to  publish, or preparation of the manuscript. no additional external funding was received for this  study.  competing interests. the authors declare that they have no financial or non-financial  competing interests. there are no financial or non-financial competing interests of other  people or organizations influencing our interpretation of data or presentation of information.    author status. all authors of this manuscript had substantial contribution to conception and  design or acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data; all revised it critically for important 


16    intellectual content and did final approval of the version to be published:  schütz uhw conceived the study, implemented the project, participated in the data collection  (mri measurements), data evaluation with statistical analysis and drafted the manuscript.  billich c participated in the implementation of the project, in the data collection (mri  measurements) and in the implementation of the project. könig k participated in the data  evaluation. würslin c participated in the data evaluation. wiedelbach h participated mainly  in the data collection (mri measurements) and in the implementation of the project.. brambs  hj participated in the implementation of the project. machann j participated in the design of  the study, its technical implementation and data evaluation. all authors read and approved the  final manuscript.    acknowledgement. we really want to thank all the athletes of tefr09 who took part at this  project. considering their immense physical and mental stress they showed an extraordinary  compliance on every day of the race.     literature / references    1. knechtle b, enggist a, jehle t: energy turnover at the race across america  (raam): a case report. int j sports med 2005, 26:499–503.  2. schütz uh, schmidt-trucksäss a, knechtle b, machann j, ehrhardt m, wiedelbach h,  freund w, gröninger s, brunner h, schulze i, brambs hj, billich c: the  transeurope footrace project: longitudinal data acquisition in a cluster  randomized mobile mri observational cohort study on 44 endurance runners at a  64-stage 4,486km transcontinental ultramarathon. bmc med 2012, 19:10:78.  3. transeurope footrace [ http://www.transeurope-footrace.org]  4. schulze i: transeurope-footrace 2009: bari - nordkap - 4.487,7 km in 64  tagesetappen. engelsdorfer verlag; 1st edition; 2010  5. brodie da, stewart ad: body composition measurement: a hierarchy of methods. j  pediatr endocrinol metab 1999, 12(6):801-816.   6. lee rc, wang z, heo m, ross r, janssen i, heymsfield sb: total-body skeletal  muscle mass: development and cross-validation of anthropometric prediction  models. am j clin nutr 2000, 72(3):796-803.  7. janssen i, heymsfield sb, baumgartner rn, ross r: estimation of skeletal muscle  mass by bioelectrical impedance analysis. j appl physiol 2000, 89(2):465-71.  8. chan dc, watts gf, barrett phr, burke v: waist circumference, waist-to-hip ratio  and body mass index as predictors of adipose tissue compartments in men. qjm  2003, 96:441–447.  9. gualdi-russo e, toselli s: influence of various factors on the measurement of  multifrequency bioimpedance. homo 2002, 53(1):1-16.  10. lee sy, gallagher d: assessment methods in human body composition. curr opin  clin nutr metab care 2008, 11(5):566-572.   11. daniel ja, sizer ps jr, latman ns: evaluation of body composition methods for  accuracy. biomed instrum technol 2005, 39:397–405.  12. vasudev s, mohan a, mohan d, farooq s, raj d, mohan v: validation of body fat  measurement by skin folds and two bioelectric impedance methods with dexa –  the chennai urban rural epidemiology study (cures-3). j assoc physicians  india 2004, 52:877–881.  13. broeder ce, burrhus ka, svanevik ls, volpe j, wilmore jh: assessing body  composition before and after resistance or endurance training. med sci sports  exerc 1997, 29:705–712. 


17    14. vogt fm, ruehm s, hunold p, de greiff a, nuefer m, barkhausen j, ladd sc: rapid  total body fat measurement by magnetic resonance imaging: quantification and  topography. rofo 2007, 179(5):480-486.  15. ross r, léger l, morris d, de guise j, guardo r: quantification of adipose tissue by  mri: relationship with anthropometric variables. j appl physiol 1992, 72(2):787- 795.  16. thomas el, saeed n, hajnal jv, brynes a, goldstone ap, frost g, bell jd: magnetic  resonance imaging of total body fat. j appl physiol 1998, 85(5):1778-1785.  17. ludescher b, machann j, eschweiler gw, vanhöfen s, maenz c, thamer c, claussen  cd, schick f: correlation of fat distribution in whole body mri with generally  used anthropometric data. invest radiol 2009, 44(11):712-719.  18. abate n, burns d, peshock rm, garg a, grundy sm: estimation of adipose tissue  mass by magnetic resonance imaging: validation against dissection in human  cadavers. j lipid res 1994, 35(8):1490-1496.   19. ross r, shaw kd, martel y, de guise j, avruch l: adipose tissue distribution  measured by magnetic resonance imaging in obese women. am j clin nutr 1993,  57:470–475.  20. poon cs, szumowski j, plewes db, ashby p, henkelman rm: fat/water quantitation  and differential relaxation time measurement using chemical shift imaging  technique. magn reson imaging 1989, 7:369–382.  21. lunati e, marzola p, nicolato e, sbarbati a: in-vivo quantitative hydrolipidic map of  perirenal adipose tissue by chemical shift imaging at 4.7 tesla. int j obes relat  metab disord 2001, 25:457–461.  22. schick f, machann j, brechtel k, strempfer a, klumpp b, stein dt, jacob s:  mri of muscular fat. magn reson med 2002, 47(4):720-727.  23. huang ty, chung hw, wang fn, ko cw, chen cy: fat and water separation in  balanced steady-state free precession using the dixon method. magn reson med  2004, 51:243–247.  24. donnelly lf, o'brien kj, dardzinski bj, poe sa, bean ja, holland sk, daniels sr:  using a phantom to compare mr techniques for determining the ratio of  intraabdominal to subcutaneous adipose tissue. ajr am j roentgenol 2003,  180:993-998.  25. machann j, thamer c, schnoedt b, haap m, haring hu, claussen cd, stumvoll m,  fritsche a, schick f: standardized assessment of whole body adipose tissue  topography by mri. j magn reson imaging 2005, 21(4):455-462.  26. würslin c, machann j, rempp h, claussen c, yang b, schick f: topography  mapping of whole body adipose tissue using a fully automated and standardized  procedure. j magn reson imaging 2010, 31(2):430-439.  27. stephens ma. test of fit for the logistic distribution based on the empirical distribution  function. biometrika1979; 66(3):591-595.  28. d´agostino rb, belanger a, d´agostino rb jr: a suggestion for using powerful  and informative test of normality. the american statistical association 1990,  44(4):316-321.  29. yazici b, yolacan s: a comparison of various tests of normality. j stat comput  simul 2007, 77(2):175-183.  30. cohen j: a power primer. psychol bull 1992, 112(1):155-159.  31. boettcher m, machann j, stefan n, thamer c, häring hu, claussen cd, fritsche a,  schick f: intermuscular adipose tissue (imat): association with other adipose  tissue compartments and insulin sensitivity. j magn reson imaging 2009,  29(6):1340-1345. 


18    32. gray ds, fujioka k, colletti pm, kim h, devine w, cuyegkeng t, pappas t:  magnetic-resonance imaging used for determining fat distribution in obesity and  diabetes. am j clin nutr 1991, 54(4):623-627.   33. bale p, rowell s, colley e: anthropometric and training characteristics of female  marathon runners as determinants of distance running performance. j sports sci  1985, 3(2):115-126.  34. raschka c, plath m: body fat compartment and its relationship to food intake and  clinical chemical parameters during extreme endurance performance. schweiz z  sportmed 1992, 40:13–25.  35. reynolds rd, lickteig ja, deuster pa, howard mp, conway jm, pietersma a,  destoppelaar j, deurenberg p: energy metabolism increases and regional body fat  decreases while regional muscle mass is spared in humans climbing mt. everest. j  nutr 1999, 129:1307–1314.  36. helge jw, lundby c, christensen dl, langfort j, messonnier l, zacho m, andersen  jl, saltin b: skiing across the greenland icecap: divergent effects on limb muscle  adaptations and substrate oxidation. j exp biol 2003, 206:1075–1083.  37. frykman pn, harman ea, opstad pk, hoyt rw, delany jp, friedl ke: effects of a  3-month endurance event on physical performance and body composition: the g2  trans-greenland expedition. wilderness environ med 2003, 14:240–248.  38. höchli d, schneiter t, ferretti g, howald h, claassen h, moia c, atchou g, belleri  m, veicsteinas a, hoppeler h: loss of muscle oxidative capacity after an extreme  endurance run: the paris-dakar foot-race. int j sports med 1995, 16:343–346.  39. knechtle b, knechtle p, andonie jl, kohler g: influence of anthropometry on race  performance in extreme endurance triathletes: world challenge deca iron  triathlon 2006. br j sports med 2007, 41(10):644-648.  40. bircher s, enggist a, jehle t: effects of an extreme endurance race on energy  balance and body composition: a case study. j sports sci med 2006, 5:154–162.  41. lehmann m, huonker m, dimeo f: serum amino acid concentrations in nine  athletes before and after the 1993 colmar ultra triathlon. int j sports med 1995,  16:155–159.  42. knechtle b, bircher s: changes in body composition during an extreme endurance  run. praxis 2005, 94:371–377.  43. dressendorfer rh, wade ce: effects of a 15-d race on plasma steroid levels and leg  muscle fitness in runners. med sci sports exerc 1991, 23:954–958.  44. nagel d, seiler d, franz h, leitzmann c, jung k: effects of an ultra-long-distance  (1000 km) race on lipid metabolism. eur j appl physiol 1989, 59:16–20.  45. väänänen ii, vihko v: physiological and psychological responses to 100 km  crosscountry skiing during 2 days. j sports med phys fitness 2005, 45:301–305.  46. raschka c, plath m, cerull r, bernhard w, jung k, leitzmann c: the body muscle  compartment and its relationship to food absorption and blood chemistry during  an extreme endurance performance. z ernährungswiss 1991, 30:276–288.  47. knechtle b, salas of andonie jl, kohler g: effect of a multistage ultra-endurance  triathlon on body composition: world challenge deca iron triathlon 2006. br j  sports med 2008, 42(2):121-125.   48. knechtle b, duff b, schule i, kohler g: a multi-stage ultra-endurance run over  1,200 km leads to a continuous accumulations of total body water. j sports sci  md.2008, 7:357-364.  49. martin ad, daniel mz, drinkwater dt, clarys jp: adipose tissue density, estimated  adipose lipid fraction and whole body adiposity in male cadavers. int j obes relat  metab disord 1994, 18(2):79-83. 


19    50. mernagh jr, harrison je, krondl a, mcneill kg, shepard rj: composition of lean  tissue in healthy volunteers for nutritional studies in health and disease. nutrition  res 1986, 6(5):499-507.  51. wells jc, williams je, chomtho s, darch t, grijalva-eternod c, kennedy k, haroun  d, wilson c, cole tj, fewtrell ms: pediatric reference data for lean tissue  properties: density and hydration from age 5 to 20 y. am j clin nutr 2010,  91(3):610-8.  52. schutte je, townsend ej, hugg j, shoup rf, malina rm, blomqvist cg: density of  lean body mass is greater in blacks than in whites. j appl physiol 1984, 56(6):1647- 649.  53. brochu m, starling rd, tchernof a, matthews de, garcia-rubi e, poehlman et:  visceral adipose tissue is an independent correlate of glucose disposal in older  obese postmenopausal women. j clin endocrinol metab 2000, 85(7):2378-2384.  54. kahn bb, flier js. obesity and insulin resistance. j clin invest 2000;106:473–481.  55. wajchenberg bl: subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue: their relation to the  metabolic syndrome. endocr rev 2000, 21:697–738.  56. sironi am, gastaldelli a, mari a, ciociaro d, postano v, buzzigoli e, ghione s,  turchi s, lomabardi m, ferrannini e: visceral fat in hypertension: influence on  insulin resistance and β-cell function. hypertension 2004, 44:127–133.  57. yusuf s, hawken s, ounpuu s, dans t, avezum a, lanas f, mcqueen m, budaj a,  pais p, varigos j, lisheng l; interheart study investigators: effect of potentially  modifiable risk factors associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the  interheart study): case-control study. lancet 2004, 364(9438):937-952.  58. montague ct, o'rahilly s: the perils of portliness: causes and consequences of  visceral adiposity. diabetes 2000, 49(6):883-888.  59. kern pa, ranganathan s, li c, wood l, ranganathan g: adipose tissue tumor  necrosis factor and interleukin-6 expression in human obesity and insulin  resistance. am j physiol endocrinol metab 2001, 280(5):e745-751.  60. marette a: molecular mechanisms of inflammation in obesity-linked insulin  resistance. int j obes relat metab disord 2003, 27 suppl 3:s46-48.  61. sharma am: mediastinal fat, insulin resistance, and hypertension. hypertension  2004, 44(2):117-118.   62. lee wj, fattal g. mediastinal lipomatosis in simple obesity. chest. 1976; 70: 308–309.  63. price je jr., rigler lg: widening of the mediastinum resulting from fat  accumulation. radiology 1970, 96:497–500.  64. stummvoll hk, wolf a, pinggera wf, lobenwein e, seidl g: rare localizations of  fat deposition in iatrogenous cushing’s syndrome. munch med wochenschr 1976,  118: 445–446.  65. enzi g, digito m, marin r, carraro r, baritussio a, manzato e: mediastino- abdominal lipomatosis: deep accumulation of fat mimicking a respiratory disease  and ascites. clinical aspects and metabolic studies in vitro. q j med 1984, 53:453– 463.  66. kopelman pg: the effects of weight loss treatments on upper and lower body fat.  int j obes relat metab disord 1997, 21(8):619-625.  67. martin ad, janssens v, caboor d, clarys jp, marfell-jones mj: relationships  between visceral, trunk and whole-body adipose tissue weights by cadaver  dissection. ann hum biol 2003, 30(6):668-677.  68. knechtle b, duff b, schulze i, rosemann t, senn o: anthropometry and pre-race  experience of finishers and nonfinishers in a multistage ultra-endurance run-- deutschlandlauf 2007. percept mot skills 2009, 109(1):105-118. 


20    69. freund w, weber f, billich c, schütz uh: the foot in multistage ultra marathon  runners: experience in a cohort study of 22 participants of the trans europe  footrace project with mobile mri. bmj open 2012,  22:2(3).  70. freund w, weber f, billich c, birklein f, breimhorst m, schütz uh: ultra marathon  runners are different. investigations into pain tolerance and personality traits of  participants of the transeurope footrace 2009. pain pract 2013, 2 [epub ahead of  print]  71. millet gy, banfi jc, kerherve h, morin jb, vincent l, estrade c, geyssant a,  feasson l: physiological and biological factors associated with a 24 h treadmill  ultra-marathon performance. scand j med sci sports 2011, 21(1):54-61.  72. maldonado s, mujika i, padilla s: influence of body mass and height on the energy  cost of running in highly trained middle- and long-distance runners. int j sports  med 2002, 23(4):268-272.  73. knechtle b, wirth a, knechtle p, zimmermann k, kohler g: personal best marathon  performance is associated with performance in a 24-h run and not anthropometry  or training volume. br j sports med 2009, 43(11):836-9.  74. hoffman md: anthropometric characteristics of ultramarathoners. int j sports  med 2008, 29(10):808-811.  75. arrese al, ostáriz es: skinfold thicknesses associated with distance running  performance in highly trained runners. j sports sci 2006, 24(1):69-76.  76. knechtle b, knechtle p, rosemann t, senn o: what is associated with race  performance in male 100-km ultra-marathoners - anthropometry, training or  marathon best time? j sports sci 2011, 23:1-7.  77. knechtle b, knechtle p, rosemann t, lepers r: predictor variables for a 100 km  race time in female ultra-marathoners. medicina sportiva 2010, 14(4):214-220.  78. tanaka k, matsuura y: a multivariate analysis of the role of certain  anthropometric and physiological attributes in distance running. ann hum biol  1982, 9(5):473-482.  79. tomaszewski m, charchar fj, przybycin m, crawford l, wallace am, gosek k, lowe  gd, zukowska-szczechowska e, grzeszczak w, sattar n, dominiczak af: strikingly  low circulating crp concentrations in ultramarathon runners independent of  markers of adiposity: how low can you go? arterioscler thromb vasc biol 2003, 23:  1640–1644.  80. morin jb, samozino p, millet gy: changes in running kinematics, kinetics, and  spring-mass behavior over a 24-h run. med sci sports exerc 2011, 43(5):829-836.  81. degache f, guex k, fourchet f, morin jb, millet gp, tomazin k, millet gy:  changes in running mechanics and spring-mass behaviour induced by a 5-hour  hilly running bout. j sports sci 2013, 31(3):299-304.  82. borrani f, candau r, perrey s, millet gy, millet gp, rouillon jd: does the  mechanical work in running change during the vo2 slow component? med sci  sports exerc 2003, 35(1):50-57.  83. brisswalter j, legros p, durand m: running economy, preferred step length  correlated to body dimensions in elite middle distance runners. j sports med phys  fitness 1996, 36: 7–15.  84. svedenhag j, sjödin b: body-mass-modified running economy and step length in  elite male middle- and long-distance runners. int j sports med 1994, 15: 305–310.  85. candau r, belli a, millet gy, georges d, barbier b, rouillon jd: energy cost and  running mechanics during a treadmill run to voluntary exhaustion in humans. eur  j appl physiol occup physiol 1998, 77(6):479-485. 


21    86. millet gp: economy is not sacrificed in ultramarathon runners. j appl physiol  2012, 113(4):686.  87. millet gy, hoffman md, morin jb: sacrificing economy to improve running  performance--a reality in the ultramarathon? j appl physio. 2012, 113(3):507-509.  88. freund w, faust s, birklein f, gaser c, wunderlich ap, mueller m, billich c,  juchems ms, schmitz bl, groen g, schütz uh: substantial and reversible brain  gray matter reduction but no acute brain lesions in ultramarathon runners:  experience from the transeurope-footrace project. bmc med 2012, 21:10:170.      figures    figure 1: semiautomatic separation of adipose bone marrow: selected slices from whole  body mri of a 32 year old male finisher of tefr09. i: ankles, ii: middle of lower legs, iii:  knees, iv: middle of upper legs, v: hip/pelvis, vi: umbilical level, vii: upper abdomen, viii:  heart/mediastinum, ix: shoulder girth, x: elbows. left row: before start (t0), green: tlt, red:  sast, yellow: vat+inf, blue: abm. right row: after 4,120km of running (t5), green: tlt,  red: sat (=sast+abm), yellow: vat+inf.  figure 2: semiautomatic separation of somatic and visceral volume (right row) and  intraluminal nutrition fat (left row): selected slices from whole body mri of a 32 year old  male finisher of tefr09. v: hip/pelvis, vi: umbilical level, vii: upper abdomen, viii:  heart/mediastinum . left row: before start (t0), green: slt, red: tsat, grey: tvv. right  row: after 4,120km of running (t5), green: tlt, red: sat (=sast+abm), yellow: vat,  blue: inf.    figure 3: topography of lean and adipose tissue changes in a 32 year old male finisher.    figure 4: comparison of total body volume vs. body mass during tefr09 (finisher, nf=12)    figure 5: adipose and lean volume percentage distribution in finishers at start and end of  tefr09 (finisher, nf=12).  figure 6: changes of somatic and visceral percentage volumes during tefr09 (finisher,  nf=12).    figure 7: post hoc analysis of significance of paired comparison of total volume  measurements at different time intervals (finisher, nf=12)  figure 8: post hoc analysis on significance of paired comparison of total fat tissue  measurements at different time intervals (finisher, nf=12)    figure 9: mean and standard error of relative changes of specific tissue volume during  tefr09 compared to start (total sample, n=22)    figure 10: absolute changes of specific tissue volume during tefr09 compared to start  (finisher, nf=12)    figure 11: absolute volume changes per km compared to start in finisher group (finisher,  nf=12).    figure 12: changes of adipose and lean tissue percentage volumes during tefr09 (finisher,  nf=12).   


22    figure 13: relative changes of visceral adipose volume during tefr09 compared to start  (total sample, n=22)    figure 14: relative changes of segmented tissue volume (ue, tr, le) during tefr09  compared to start (finisher, nf=12)    figure 15: dropout rate  figure 16: difference between f and nf regarding percentage tissue volumes before start of  tefr09 and at mi t1.    figure17: difference between f and nf regarding relative volume changes of tissue  compartments at first measurement interval (t1) of tefr09.    figure 18: correlation (one-tailed test) of percentage volumes and prerace-performance.    figure 19: correlation of adipose and lean volumes at start with performance at tefr09.      


23    tables    table 1: abbreviations of compartments after tissue mapping and segmentation with mobile  whole body mri data sets (t2*).  abbreviation description, definition  tissue mapping in specific compartments  abm adipose bone marrow  tv total volume of the body (from ankle to wrist), without inf  tvv total visceral volume: includes intrathoracic and intraabdominal volume.  tsv total somatic volume (tv without tvv).  tlt total lean tissue  vlt visceral lean tissue: includes lean tissue of intrathoracic and intraabdominal organs.  slt somatic lean tissue: mostly muscles  tat total adipose tissue (without inf)  sat somatic adipose tissue (tat without vat)  tast total adipose soft tissue (tat without abm)  sast somatic adipose soft tissue (tat without abm and vat)  scat subcutaneous adipose tissue (sast without imat)  imat intermuscular adipose tissue (sast without scat)  vat visceral adipose tissue (iaat + mat without inf)  iaat intraabdominal adipose tissue: retroperitoneal and intraperitoneal (mesenteric, omental) fat depots (without inf)  mat intrathoracic, mainly mediastinal adipose tissue  inf (undigested) intraluminal nutrition fat in the gastrointestinal tract  tissue mapping of body segments  tv-le total volume of lower extremities (apex trochanter major to ankle joint)  tv-tr total volume of trunk (acromion to apex of trochanter major)  tv-ue total volume of upper extremities (wrist to acromion level)  lt-le lean tissue volume of lower extremities (apex trochanter major to ankle joint)  lt-tr lean soft tissue volume of trunk (acromion to apex of trochanter major)  lt-ue lean soft tissue volume of upper extremities (wrist to acromion level)  ast-le adipose soft tissue volume of lower extremities (apex trochanter major to ankle joint)  ast-tr adipose soft tissue volume of trunk (acromion to apex of trochanter major)  ast-ue adipose soft tissue volume of upper extremities (wrist to acromion level)      


24    table 2: mean volumes [l] of body compartments and segments (all subjects).  abbreviation t0: start t1: 317- 789km  t2: 1003- 1635 km  t3: 2516- 2738 km  t4: 3234- 3669 km  t5: 4037- 4440 km  tissue mapping in specific compartments  tv 57.70 56.63 54.75 53.39 54.16 52.65  tvv 8.74 8.34 7.93 7.64 7.65 7.58  tsv 48.97 48.29 46.82 45.74 46.51 45.08  tlt 44.34 44.61 45.07 45.38 46.20 45.52  vlt 7.02 7.04 7.01 7.10 7.14 7.12  slt 37.32 37.56 38.06 38.28 39.06 38.40  tat 13.36 12.02 9.68 8.00 7.96 7.14  sat 11.65 10.73 8.76 7.46 7.45 6.68  tast 11.52 10.19 7.76 6.05 6.01 5.19  sast 9.81 8.89 6.84 5.51 5.50 4.73  vat 1.71 1.30 0.92 0.54 0.51 0.45  iaat 1.55 1.15 0.77 0.39 0.36 0.33  mat 0.17 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.14 0.13  inf 0.05 0.21 0.36 0.57 0.70 0.86  abm 1.98 1.93 1.92 1.95 1.95 1.95  tissue mapping of body segments  tv-le 23.51 22.49 21.46 21.65 22.02 20.60  tv-tr 28.83 28.63 27.86 26.57 27.03 27.00  tv-ue 5.79 5.89 5.75 5.73 5.64 5.60  tlt-le 17.51 16.97 16.82 17.45 17.83 16.97  tlt-tr 23.22 23.12 23.46 23.02 23.39 23.39  tlt-ue 4.79 4.62 4.70 4.81 4.74 4.77  sast-le 4.84 4.36 3.43 2.96 2.96 2.40  sast-tr 4.31 3.47 2.12 1.02 0.99 0.81  sast-ue 0.98 0.95 0.72 0.57 0.54 0.48      


25    table 3: bm and bmi loss during tefr09  n distance  run  [km]  bm  [kg]  bmi  [kg/m²]  all f nf all f nf all f mean mean sd mean sd mean sd mean sd mean sd mean 22 12 10 0.00 71.75 11.13 72.07 11.23 71.38 11.60 23.58 2.55 23.36 2.58 23. 15 10 5 116.1 72.43 10.82 71.38 12.48 74.54 7.14 23.33 2.47 22.98 2.75 24. 20 11 9 354.2 70.53 11.67 72.20 11.63 68.49 12.07 23.18 2.68 23.26 2.58 23. 21 12 9 618.5 70.20 11.20 70.51 11.04 68.08 12.22 22.98 2.59 22.84 2.35 22. 20 12 8 893.8 68.73 10.96 70.04 10.60 66.76 11.92 22.68 2.51 22.70 2.23 22. 17 12 5 1168.2 69.52 10.65 69.83 10.78 68.76 11.56 22.72 2.31 22.62 2.23 22. 16 12 4 1456.9 68.18 10.72 68.93 10.70 65.93 12.09 22.20 2.21 22.33 2.25 21. 15 12 3 1754.0 68.39 10.61 68.65 10.45 67.37 13.59 22.26 2.08 22.24 2.12 22. 15 12 3 2026.1 67.64 10.93 67.94 10.57 66.43 14.78 22.01 2.18 22.01 2.19 22. 14 11 3 2294.2 68.01 10.81 68.19 10.75 67.37 13.47 22.11 2.13 22.03 2.18 22. 14 12 2 2594.5 67.05 10.83 67.44 10.30 64.70 18.53 21.73 2.05 21.85 2.18 20. 14 12 2 2852.0 68.88 9.85 67.66 10.14 76.20 2.12 22.17 2.19 21.92 2.09 23. 13 12 1 3134.2 68.45 9.95 67.73 10.04 77.00  21.90 1.95 21.95 2.03 21. 13 12 1 3401.7 68.58 10.07 67.78 10.06 78.30  21.93 1.91 21.95 1.99 21. 12 12  3724.8 67.35 10.16 67.35 10.16   21.82 2.15 21.82 2.15  12 12  4010.8 67.48 9.91 67.48 9.91   21.87 2.06 21.87 2.06  12 12  4307.3 66.83 10.50 66.83 10.50   21.64 2.12 21.64 2.12      table 3: significance of topographic tissue volume changes regarding percentage volume  [vol. %].   mauchly- test univariate anova b multivariate anovac  [vol.%] p-value f value p value test power f value p value  test  power  tsv 0.322 2.565 0.058 0.640 - - -  tvv 0.322 2.565 0.058 0.640 - - -  tlta 0.000 44.605 0.000 1.000 51.592 0.000 1.000  slta 0.000 43.573 0.000 1.000 19.556 0.001 1.000  vlta 0.005 22.980 0.000 1.000 6.699 0.013 0.884  tata 0.000 44.655 0.000 1.000 52.762 0.000 1.000  sasta 0.000 44.721 0.000 1.000 57.109 0.000 1.000  vata 0.000 23.718 0.000 1.000 8.598 0.007 0.950  a: mean differences are significant, b: “greenhouse-geisser” correction procedure was used,  c: pillai-spur, wilks-lambda, hotelling-spur and “biggest characteristical root of roy”        


26    table 4: significance of topographic tissue volume changes regarding absolute volume  measurements [l] (nf=12).   mauchly- test univariate anova b multivariate anovac  [l] p-value f value p value test power f value p value  test  power  tva 0.000 20.162 0.000 0.999 5.758 0.020 0.828  tsva 0.001 18.607 0.000 0.999 4.937 0.030 0.762  tvva 0.000 21.516 0.000 0.999 8.678 0.007 0.952  tlt 0.516 1.209 0.322 0.307 - - -  slt 0.516 1.209 0.322 0.307 - - -  tata 0.000 32.274 0.000 1.000 18.577 0.001 1.000  sasta 0.000 32.692 0.000 1.000 15.624 0.001 0.998  vata 0.000 21.607 0.000 0.999 8.594 0.007 0.950  a: mean differences are significant, b: “greenhouse-geisser” correction procedure was used,  c: pillai-spur, wilks-lambda, hotelling-spur and “biggest characteristical root of roy”      table 5: significance of segmental volume changes regarding repeated absolute volume [l]  measurements (nf=12).   mauchly -test univariate anova b multivariate anovac  [l] p-value f-value p value test power f-value p value  test  power  tv_le 0.003 7.763 0.002 0.946 2.341 0.149 0.423  tv_tra 0.133 6.349 0.003 0.918 - - -  tv_uea 0.001 27.504 0.000 1.000 13.942 0.002 0.996  slt_le 0.003 6.411 0.20 0.733 14.587 0.095 0.597  slt_tr 0.252 3.534 0.21 0.769 - - -  slt_ue 0.700 3.128 0.29 0.734 - - -  sast_lea 0.000 63.294 0.000 1.000 20.644 0.000 1.000  sast_tra 0.000 17.388 0.000 0.996 13.387 0.002 0.995  sast_uea 0.000 16.151 0.000 0.987 3.389 0.041 0.584  a: mean differences are significant, b: “greenhouse-geisser” correction procedure was used,  c: pillai-spur, wilks-lambda, hotelling-spur and “biggest characteristical root of roy”    tv_lea 0.001 27.504 0.000 1.000 13.942 0.002 0.996  tv_tra 0.133 6.349 0.003 0.918 - - -  tv_ue 0.003 7.763 0.002 0.946 2.341 0.149 0.423        


27    table 6: analyis on difference of percentage volume [vol%] between f/nf at start (t0) and  mi (t1, t2) for total, lean and adipose tissue compartments.   t0: nf=12, nnf=10 t1: nf=12, nnf=8 t2: nf=12, nnf=6    mean diff. of  percentage  volume [vol.%]  p value  (itt*)  mean diff. of  percentage  volume [vol.%]  p value  (itt*)  mean diff. of  percentage  volume [vol.%]  p value  (itt*)  tsv 1.52 0.005a 1.35 0.036a 1.07 0.182  tvv -1.52 0.005a 1.35 0.036a 1.07 0.182  tlt 4.04 0.031a 6.39 0.015a 5.05 0.088  slt 4.16 0.014a 6.18 0.010a 4.65 0.058  vlt 0.032 0.953 0.21 0.707 0.39 0.604  tat -5.47 0.031a -6.39 0.015a -5.04 0.088  sast -4.21 0.080 -5.27 0.032a -3.64 0.184  vat -1.60 0.006a -1.56 0.021a -1.46 0.060  t0: at start of tefr09, t1: stage 5-12 (317-789 km), t2: stage 15-24 (1,003-1,635 km)  *itt: t-test for independent samples  a: mean differences between finishers and non-finishers are significant      table 7: analyis on difference of relative volume changes [%] at mi t1 and t2 compared to  start between f/nf for total, lean and adipose tissue compartments.   t1 vs. t0: nf=11, nnf=9 t2 vs. t0: nf=11, nnf=7    mean diff. of  relative changes  [%]  p value  (itt*)  mean diff. of  relative changes  [%]  p value  (itt*)  tv 0.47 0.608 -1.49 0.306  tsv 0.41 0.690 -2.06 0.190  tvv 0.69 0.640 1.35 0.410  tlt 1.09 0332 -0.18 0.913  slt 1.34 0.319 -0.21 0.917  vlt 0.07 0.923 -0.24 0.545  tat -4.86 0.086 -9.52 0.078  sast -6.93 0.031a -14.27 0.046a  vat -8.92 0.191 -8.88 0.276  t0: at start of tefr09, t1: stage 5-12 (317-789 km), t2: stage 15-24 (1,003-1,635 km)  *itt: t-test for independent samples  a: mean differences between finishers and non-finishers are significant      


28    table 8: endurance running history of subjects (n=22)   mean sd 95%-percentile range  years of regular endurance running 17.4 7.6 6.3-31.8 6-32  m finished [n] 123,1 218,2 2-297.8 2-988  um finished [n] 90,8 68 11.3-248.9 11-255  msum finished [n] 6,3 2,9 1.3-13.6 1-14  endurance training extent 2008 (one year before tefr)  annual running distance [km/y] 5468 1720 3000-9000 2580-9152  prt08 volume [km/week] 105.1 32.4 50.8-175.4 50-176  prt08 time [h/week] 12.5 3.1 7.1-19.6 7-20  prt08 intensity [km/h] 8.3 1.5 6.5-10.9 7-11  endurance training extent last 2 months before tefr  total running distance [km] 898 267 500-1260 500-1500  prt09 volume [km/week] 110.5 33.8 60.5-186 60-190  prt09 time [h/week] 13.2 3.5 8-21.6 8-22      table 9: distribution type and analyses on difference between f/nf regarding pre-race  performance indices    values  mean  (sd)  test on normal  distribution  shapiro-wilk  [29]  test on  difference  f/nf valid missing   n n [%] f nf statistic p test type* p**  pry [yrs] 21 1 4.5 16.5 18.7 0.936 0.185a itt 0.530  nf m [n] 19 3 13.6 81.5 194.3 0.481 0.000 mwu 0.211  nf um [n] 22 0 0 94.8 86.0 0.858 0.005 mwu 0.895  nf msum [n] 22 0 0 7.0 5.4 0.936 0.165a itt 0.146  prtvol08 [km/week] 21 1 4.5  117.9  (34.3)  88.0  (20.8) 0.959 0.505 a itt 0.032b  prttime08 [h/week] 21 1 4.5 13.0 11.9 0.971 0.761a itt 0.427  prtint08 [km/h] 22 0 0  9.0  (1.47)  7.5  (0.93) 0.909 0.044 mwu 0.040 b  prtvol09 [km/week] 21 1 4.5  126.1  (35.2)  89.7  (17.4) 0.956 0.435 a itt 0.010b  prttime09 [h/week] 21 1 4.5 14.2 12.0 0.947 0.303a itt 0.159  prrm [h] 15 7 31.8 3.1 3.1 0.851 0.018 mwu 0.676  prr50km [h] 9 13 59.1  4.3  (0.57)  5.1  (0.26) 0.914 0.343 a itt 0.026b  prr100km [h] 17 5 22.7 9.5 10.4 0.933 0.248a itt 0.241  prr6hr [km] 13 9 40.9 67.9 59.7 0.918 0.238a itt 0.218  prr12hr [km] 10 12 54.5 99.9 87.3 0.940 0.548a itt 0.558  prr24hr [km] 16 6 27.3  199.8  (22.5)  168.5  (26.0) 0.961 0.672 a itt 0.036b  *itt: independent t-test; mwu: mann-whitney-u test; ** bilateral (asymptotic) test  a: significance not shown (p > 0.05): normal distribution accepted; b: mean differences  between finishers and non-finishers are significant   


figure 1


figure 2


figure 3


figure 4





figure 6


figure 7


figure 8


figure 9


figure 10


figure 11


figure 12


figure 13


figure 14


figure 15


figure 16


figure 17


figure 18


figure 19
