

  1/35  comparing sociocultural features of cholera in three endemic  african settings    christian schaetti1,2, neisha sundaram1,2, sonja merten1,2, said m ali3, erick o nyambedha4, bruno  lapika5, claire-lise chaignat6, raymond hutubessy7, mitchell g weiss1,2*    1 department of epidemiology and public health, swiss tropical and public health institute,  socinstrasse 57, po box, 4002 basel, switzerland  2 university of basel, petersplatz 1, 4003 basel, switzerland  3 public health laboratory ivo de carneri, po box 122, wawi, chake-chake, pemba, zanzibar,  united republic of tanzania  4 department of sociology and anthropology, maseno university, private bag, maseno, kenya  5 department of anthropology, university of kinshasa, po box 127, kinshasa xi, democratic  republic of congo  6 global task force on cholera control, world health organization, 20, avenue appia, 1211 geneva  27, switzerland  7 initiative for vaccine research, world health organization, 20, avenue appia, 1211 geneva 27,  switzerland      cs: christian.schaetti@unibas.ch   ns: neisha.sundaram@unibas.ch  sm: sonja.merten@unibas.ch  sma: saidmali2003@yahoo.com   eon: nyambedha@maseno.ac.ke  bl: lapikadi@yahoo.fr   clc: chaignatc@who.int   rh: hutubessyr@who.int   mgw: mitchell-g.weiss@unibas.ch        *corresponding author: mitchell-g.weiss@unibas.ch  


  2/35  abstract  background  cholera mainly affects developing countries where a supply of safe water supply and sanitation  infrastructure is at bestare often rudimentary. sub-saharan africa is a cholera hotspot. effective  cholera control requires not only a professional assessment, but also consideration of community- based priorities. this studypaper compares local sociocultural features of endemic cholera in urban  and rural sites from three field studies in southeastern democratic republic of congo (se-drc),  western kenya (w-kenya) and zanzibar.   methods  a vignette-based semi-structured interview was used in 2008 in zanzibar to study sociocultural  features of cholera-related illness among 356 men and women from urban and rural communities.  similar cross-sectional surveys were done in w-kenya (n=379) and in se-drc (n=360) in 2010.  systematic comparison across all settings considered the following domains: illness identification;  perceived seriousness, potential fatality and past household episodes; illness-related experience;  meaning; knowledge of prevention; help-seeking behavior; and perceived vulnerability.  results  cholera is a well-known entity in all three settings and was perceived as havingis understood to have  a significant impact on people’s lives. its social impact was mainly characterized by financial  concerns. problems with unsafe water, sanitation and dirty environments were the most common  perceived causes across settings; nonetheless, non-biomedical explanations were widespread in rural  areas of se-drc and zanzibar. safe food and water and vaccines were prioritized for prevention in  se-drc. safe water was prioritized in w-kenya along with sanitation and health education. the  latter two were also prioritized in zanzibar. use of oral rehydration solutions and rehydration was a  top priority everywhere; health care facilities were universally reported as a primary source of help.  respondents in se-drc and zanzibar reported cholera as affecting almost everybody without  differentiating much betweenfor gender, age and class; fewer did so in zanzibar. respondents. in 


  3/35  contrast, in w-kenya differentiated more between genders and identified , gender differentiation was  pronounced, and children and the poor were regarded as most vulnerable to cholera.  conclusions  this comprehensive review identified common and distinctive features of local understandings of  cholera and priorities for control indicates that classical. classical treatment (i.e., rehydration) is likely  to be very effective was highlighted as a priority for control in the three studied african study settings  and is likely to be identified in the region beyond. findings encourageindicate the value of insight  from community studies to guide local program planners to intensify control activities and to consider  the use of vaccinesplanning for endemic cholera control until adequate water and sanitation programs  are installed.and elimination.       keywords  endemic cholera; sociocultural features; community study, eeastern africa 


  4/35  background  cholera is an ancient enteric disease that originated from the ganges delta. it is caused by the  bacterium vibrio cholerae that exists in the aquatic environment independent from human hosts. v.  cholerae produces an enterotoxin, which is the direct cause of acute watery diarrhea in humans.  cholera is characterized by loss of large volumes of rice-water-like stool leading to severe  dehydration and concurrent electrolyte depletion [1]. case-fatality rates without treatment may reach  50%. timely administration of oral rehydration solutions or infusions is the principal treatment [2].  global cholera burden and sub-saharan africa as a hotspot  cholera case estimates officially reported to the who ranged between 190,000 and 320,000 for the  years 2008, 2009 and 2010, and between 5,000 and 7,500 deaths were reported [3-5]. these figures,  however, are highly underreported because of limitations in surveillance, including case definitions,  and also fear of trade- and travel-related sanctions; they likely represent less than 10% of the true  burden [6]. a recent study estimated the number of people at risk of endemic cholera globally at 1.4  billion, with an annual burden of endemic cholera of 2.8 million cases and 91,000 deaths [7]. cholera  thrives mostly in low- and middle-income countries in africa, asia and the caribbean [8].  cholera is an ancient enteric disease that originated from the ganges delta [1]. it is caused by the  bacterium vibrio cholerae that exists in the aquatic environment independent from human hosts [2,3].  v. cholerae produces an enterotoxin, which is the direct cause of acute watery diarrhea in humans.  cholera is characterized by loss of large volumes of rice-water-like stool leading to severe  dehydration and concurrent electrolyte depletion [4]. case-fatality rates without treatment may reach  50% [5]. timely administration of oral rehydration solutions or infusions is the principal treatment  [6].  global cholera burden and sub-saharan africa as a hotspot  cholera case estimates officially reported to the who ranged between 190,000 and 320,000 for the  years 2008, 2009 and 2010, and between 5,000 and 7,500 deaths were reported [7-9]. these figures,  however, are highly underreported because of limitations in surveillance, including case definitions,  and also fear of trade- and travel-related sanctions; they likely represent less than 10% of the true 


  5/35  burden [10]. a recent study estimated the number of people at risk of endemic cholera globally at 1.4  billion, with an annual burden of endemic cholera of 2.8 million cases and 91,000 deaths [11].  cholera thrives mostly in low- and middle-income countries in africa, asia and the caribbean [12].    according to the latest estimates, 39% of the population in sub-saharan africa lived without safe  water in 2010 (vs. 51% in 1990), with an urban share of 17% and a rural share of 51% [913]. use of  improved sanitation in the same region has been increasing from 26% to 30% since 1990. similar to  the estimates on water supply, there is also an urban-–rural divide: 43% of urban people benefited  from improved sanitation in 2010 vs. only 23% in the rural areas.    the public health burden of cholera is still intolerable in sub-saharan africa despite the above noted  progress in the provision of safe water and sanitation. as a consequence and because of the recent  huge outbreaks in zimbabwe, pakistan and haiti, the 64th world health assembly adopted a new  resolution in 2011 to strengthen the global fight against cholera [1014].    the world health organization (who) recommends provision of sufficient, safe water and adequate  sanitation and hygiene (wash) as the mainstay to prevent cholera [1115]. official recommendations  also include the use of oral cholera vaccines (ocvs) as a supplementary public health tool for  preemptive or reactive control of cholera outbreaks [1216].     effective implementation requires consideration of local environmental, social, cultural and gender- related features of communities where wash and ocvs are made available for cholera control.  differences among these features across the large continent of africa may vary.  professional vs. community-reported burden of cholera  the burden of cholera may be characterized with reference to professional indicators (as reported  above) or from, and it may also be studied with reference to the local vantage point of community  experience. the public health importance of cholera based onwith reference to professional indicators 


  6/35  has been extensively studied (i.e., disease-related morbidity and mortality, characterization and  distribution of pathogens, classical epidemiologic risk factors, economic costs etc.) has been [2- 4,11,17-19]. it is widely studied [1,7,13-17]. recognizing the factrecognized that cholera—being the  classical epidemic and pandemic disease— can spread rapidly and easily within countries (e.g., kenya  [1820]) and across countries and continents, official.  official who policy also recommends the  development of “national and subregional action plans that include cross-border collaboration […] to  enhance multidisciplinary prevention, and preparedness and response activities” for effective cholera  control [1115] (p. 302).     studies for cholera in africa have assessedin contrast with public health professionals, communities  may prioritize other issues. lay people may care more about illness-related costs than morbidity, and  they may perceive the risk of illness with reference to their local rather than regional burden of  endemic and epidemic choleraexperiences. community perceptions of the causes of illness may also  differ from a professional perspective [15,19-23],concepts, and countries report the official  morbiditythis may affect their perceived relevance and mortality figures that are published annually  by the who [24]. this crucial information is a prerequisite to identify cholera hotspots and facilitates  the coordination of national and regional efforts to maximize the use of the oftentimes constrained  resources for cholera value of recommended strategies for control.  community-based study of cholera in eastern africa  although assessment of the community-reported burden and local priorities for cholera control are  considered essential for effective public health planning and program implementation, they have  hardly been studied. neglecting or underestimating local sociocultural aspects of cholera and  priorities for control hasmay limit the potential to negatively affecteffectiveness of interventions and  control programs [25,2621-23]. a recent . this point has been elaborated in a review of the  contribution of social science research foron neglected tropical diseases of poverty highlighted, which  highlights the “importance of community participation for the successful introduction, acceptability, 


  7/35  and adherence of innovative vector control interventions and new drugs and diagnostics” [2724] (p.  4).     acknowledging the dearth of community-based studies to inform cholera control programs, a series of  sociocultural studies were done within a who-managed initiative to studynotwithstanding the  acknowledged importance of community-based studies, there are very few in africa. some have  considered questions about perceived vulnerability and social and environmental aspects of cholera  [23,25], but systematic assessment of cholera-related experience, meaning and behaviour is lacking.  in response to this dearth of community-based research, three sociocultural field studies were  undertaken in a who initiative to examine local urban and rural features of cholera and community  willingness to accept an ocv in eastern africa. a project in zanzibar (tanzania) examined  sociocultural features of cholera with a semi-structured interview and estimated anticipated  acceptance and uptake of ocvs in endemic areas in 2008/2009 [2826]. two additional surveys using  an almost identical instrument were conducted in 2010 in endemic settings in western kenya (w- kenya) and the southeastern democratic republic of congo (se-drc). these three databases on  community views of cholera have been analyzed with a focus on site-specific similarities and  differences [29,3027,28] (merten et al., unpublished data). a second set of analyses has examined  sociocultural determinants of anticipated ocv acceptance in all three settings [29-31-33]; and of  ocv uptake in zanzibar [34,3532,33].    the aim of this paper is to review and systematically compare local cholera-related recognition, risk  perceptions, experience, and meaning, knowledge in endemic african settings. knowledge of  prevention, help-seeking behavior and perceived vulnerabilities inare also considered. data come  from the three cross-sectional interview-based surveys from endemic african settings; particular  referencementioned above. particular attention is given to site (i.e., urban vs. rural) and gender- specific features. since (given the vastness of eeastern) africa is large, it is hypothesizedexpected  that some features may be common while others may be locally distinctive, and that a systematic 


  8/35  assessment of their distribution in cholera-endemic communities is likely to be relevant for informing  a regionally tailored cholera control strategy.  methods  study settings by country  study sites for the survey in zanzibar were chosen in 2008 based on a review of the local cholera  burden and deliberations between the ministry of health and mass vaccination campaign  implementers. study sites in w-kenya and se-drc were selected in 2010 based on (i)  epidemiological data collected from recent cholera outbreaks, (ii) comparability of urban and rural  sites with reference to the survey sites in zanzibar and (iii) considerations regarding the security of  the research team (se-drc) and accessibility (w-kenya). the following is a brief description of the  urban and rural study sites in each setting, including the national and local cholera situation and  related control activities around the time of the surveys. more details can be found in the individual  publications mentioned previously.   se-drc: katanga province, southeastern democratic republic of congo  the survey took place in kasenga district, in drc’s southeastern katanga province. the first waves  of the current seventh cholera pandemic reached drc in 1974 (then called zaïre). drc has reported  outbreaks of cholera every year since 1990. the country’s east borderingeastern part of the country,  which borders the african great lakes region, has traditionally been a focus of cholera, withand  katanga province is among the four most affected provinces [36,3734,35]. in 2010, 13,884 cases were  reported by the who for drc [59]. in 2011, the united nations office for the coordination of  humanitarian affairs (ocha) reported 22,233 cases, with 2,701 cases (12%) coming from katanga  province [3836]. in the absence of a proper water and sanitation structureinfrastructure in the area,  cholera transmission dynamics and severity of outbreaks are mainly driven by environmental (e.g.,  seasonal rainfall, the el niño phenomenon) and human factors, like travel and trade [3937].     primary health care in drc is in principle free, but user fees in the form of a low flat rate or full-cost  recovery have also been introduced in certain areas [4038]. even if no formal user fees are expected, 


  9/35  patients will rarely be treated anywhere in the country if they do not pay informal fees; this and the  fact that health centers are often out-of-stock and understaffed reflects the poor state of the public  health care system in drc.    cholera control activities have been mainly reactive with a focus on patient treatment in the epidemic- prone lakes region. public awareness and information campaigns have been conducted after outbreaks  in bigger cities with less cholera outbreaks in southern katanga region (i.e., lubumbashi, mbuji- mayi, etc.) [3634]. outbreak response usually includes setting up of treatment centers organized by  governmental and non-governmental institutions.    the small town of kasenga, located 208 km east of the provincial capital lubumbashi, was chosen as  the urban site. kasenga is situated on the luapula river that shares a border with zambia. kasenga is  divided into eight quarters with a total population of 27,000 inhabitants on a surface area of 10 km2.  the town is predominantly populated by bemba-speaking people. kasenga is the terminal  stationterminus for land and water transportation systems in the area. buses, including buses from  lubumbashi as well asand boats coming from pweto, located north of kasenga on lake mweru,  arrive here. residents of kasenga depend mainly on three means of livelihood: agriculture, fishing,  and commerce. the urban site in se-drc was a quarter of kasenga called mwalimu, which was  inhabited by approximately 10,300 inhabitants and is characterized by a high density of buildings. no  sanitation is available and a water supply that works only sporadically has been installed overonly in  the last few years.    the island of nkolé, situated approximately 120 km downstream offrom kasenga in lake mweru,  was chosen as the rural site. approximately 7,000 mostly bemba people live in nkolé; they are  mainly engaged in agriculture and fisheries. one part of the population is seasonally migrating to  cultivate their fields along the river between november and march when fishing is usually  closedprohibited.   


  10/35  availability of sound data on cholera morbidity is a problem in the area. a manual review of case  registers over the last three years at the health posts serving both study sites confirmed the seasonal  influence as there were more cholera episodes during the rainy season. kasenga was itself identified  as “sanctuary” for cholera outbreaks among six other cities in eastern drc [4139]. the true cholera  burden, however, is likely to be higher because of underreporting due to the limited accessibility of  health services during the rainy season and due to rumors accompanying cholera outbreaks in the past.   w-kenya: nyanza province, western kenya  both survey sites in kenya were in nyanza province, which borders lake victoria. the lake victoria  region has been regularly affected by the current cholera pandemic since 1977/1978. cholera  outbreaks have disproportionately affected nyanza province in recent years in comparison to the rest  of kenya [4240]. more than 14,000 cholera-related hospitals admissions to hospitals in the province  were reported in the province in 1997/1998, with a cfr of 4% [4341]. another large cholera outbreak  started in late 2007 in the aftermath of post-election violence, causing high mortality rates [2342].  forin 2009, more than 11,000 countrywide cases were reported to the who [48].    apart from public health care facilities, there are private health care facilities owned by different  stakeholders, including multinationals such as the aga khan foundation, faith-based organizations  and individuals. they are perceivedthought to offer better services, but are very expensive (minimum  of kes 500 per visit). after the recent biglarge outbreak of 2009, control activities in the affected  areas entailed health talks given to the communities. the health talks were about creatingintended to  promote awareness aboutof cholera, theits mode of transmission of cholera, preventive measures,  prevention and clinical presentations of cholera..     cholera treatment centers (ctcs) are organized only during an outbreak and all the services are  supposedly forsupposed to be free of charge. private health care facilities too are also not permitted to  charge for their services for treatment of treating cholera, according to government policy.    


  11/35  urban interviews were done in the provincial capital kisumu, which is the third largest city in kenya.  in 2004, about 60% of kisumu’s population lived in slums [4443]. migration into kisumu from  surrounding districts has been predominant due topredominantly motivated by better resources and  employment opportunities. migrants are most likely to settle in the already impoverished slum areas.     the urban site was nyalenda a, a slum in west kolwa location of kisumu district, characterized by a  high population density (23,731 residents living on a 2.8 km2 surface area in 1999), poor planning,  insufficient infrastructure and a severe shortage of basic facilities such as sanitation, safe water,  sewerage and electricity [4544]. only one dispensary and one private clinic served this community at  the time of the study. disposal of solid waste is a major problem. the rural site in siaya district is  comprised of nine villages in kakum kombewa sub-location. according to a 2007 survey in 2007,  3,729 people lived in 1,013 households in the study area [4645]. no health care facility was available  to villagers in the rural site in early 2010. since then, however, three dispensaries have been  constructed [4746]. access to the siaya district hospital is difficult because of irregular motorized  transport. a survey conducted in 2007 revealed that almost every homestead of kakum kombewa  was dependent on water from unprotected sources and latrine coverage was 74% [4645].  zanzibar archipelago, tanzania  the survey in zanzibar, which is an archipelago 50 km off the coast of mainland tanzania, was done  on its two major islands, unguja and pemba. approximately 1.2 million predominantly muslim  people live in zanzibar, which is a major tourist destination. it is believed that cholera reached  zanzibar as early as 1821 during the first pandemic [481], with subsequent outbreaks in later  pandemics. in the current pandemic, cholera was reported for the first time in 1978 [4947]. more than  13 outbreaks followed since then and the annual incidence rate reached 0.5 per 1,000 population  between 1997 and 2007 [5048]. outbreaks usually follow a seasonal pattern (i.e., they occur during  flooding in the rainy season), cholera incidence on the archipelago was shown to be positively  influenced by rainfall and temperature [5149]. estimates from the ministry of health reported a total 


  12/35  of 48 cases with a cholera diagnosis admitted to health care facilities in 2008, 736 cases in 2009 and  248 cases in 2010 [50-52-54].     the public health care system in zanzibar is divided into three levels: the primary, the secondary and  the tertiary level. each of the two islands constitutes a zone, headed by a zonal medical officer. over  100 primary health care units serve the population; these units are open during the day to outpatients,  provide basic services and are within easy reach for over 90% of the population. four primary health  care centers (two per zone) operate on a 24-hours basis and can admit up to 30 patients.     cholera is a recognized priority disease in zanzibar and control activities follow national guidelines  [5553]. once an outbreak has been declared, a concerted response follows that usually that involves  deployment of cholera treatment kits, personnel for outbreak investigation, clinical treatment and  follow up activities. ctcs are set up in government health facilities or schools close to communities  where the outbreak has occurred. medical treatment (i.e., infusions, antibiotics, ors) for suspected  cholera patients is free; affected families mainly incur direct costs to feed the patient [1719].     chumbuni, in the urban district on unguja island, was chosenselected as the urban study site for the  survey; mwambe, a village in mkoani district on pemba island, was the rural study site. chumbuni  was inhabited by approximately 11,000 people at the time of the study [2927]. this peri-urban slum- like extension of the capital of zanzibar is characterized by a high population density of 15,300/km2  and brick houses with corrugated roofs. mwambe was less densely populated (800/km2), with a  population of approximately 8,000 people living in mud houses with thatched roofs in widely  scattered hamlets.   survey design and instrument  the survey in zanzibar was conducted from june to august 2008 in collaboration with the ministry of  health and the public health laboratory, ivo de carneri; the survey was followed by a mass  vaccination campaign in early 2009. the survey in w-kenya was done from march to may 2010 in 


  13/35  collaboration with maseno university, kisumu. the survey in se-drc was conducted from august  to september 2010 togetheralong with researchers from the universities of kinshasa and lubumbashi.     a semi-structured explanatory model interview based on the explanatory model interview catalogue  (emic)) framework [5654] was used in all three settings. each version was developed and adapted to  the local context (see additional files 1-3).    a random sample of adults was interviewed in each survey. the interview was introduced with a  vignette telling the respondents a story about a local person suffering from key signs and symptoms of  cholera. the vignette used in zanzibar—based on which the vignettes for w-kenya and se-drc  were also developed— is available as an additional file in schaetti et al. [2927]. it was the basis for  adaptation and use of vignettes in w-kenya and se-drc. variables elicited in relationfrom responses  to questions about the condition depicted in the vignette were related to several domains:  identification; perceived seriousness, fatality and past personal and household episodes of cholera;  illness-related experience (operationalized as patterns of distress indicating priority symptoms and  concerns about the illness); meaning (perceived causes); priorities for prevention (e.g., hygiene and  sanitation); behavior (help seeking at home and outside the household); and perceived vulnerability to  the illness. sociodemographic characteristics were also recorded. interviews were conducted in  kiswahili (in all three settings), and additionally in cibemba (se-drc) and dholuo (w-kenya).  ethics statement  ethics approval to conduct interviews was obtained by each individual study from the following  review bodies: who research ethics review committee (w-kenya, zanzibar), the university of  kinshasa (se-drc), the kenya medical research institute (w-kenya) and the ministry of health  ethics committee of zanzibar (zanzibar). all participants had provided written informed consent  prior to being interviewed. 


  14/35  approach to analysis  interview items were analyzed according to both frequency and prominence,. calculation of the  prominence was based on whether a category was mentioned spontaneously, upon by the respondent  in response to an open-ended question (assigned value of 2), only probing, specific categories  (assigned value of 1), and accounting for whether it was identified as most importantparamount  among all reported categories. (additional value of 3). each domain is presented in a table by setting,  divided into panels for overall results, urban and rural site comparisons and gender comparisons. the  three most prominent categories for each setting and any category with a significant difference  between site and between genders are presented for the domains related toof  illness experience,  meaning, knowledge of prevention and behavior. cross-setting comparisons of the three most  prominent categories and site and gender comparisons were done by using the non-parametric  wilcoxon or kruskal wallis test for ranked prominence data and the chi2 or fisher’s exact test for  proportions. more detailed and comprehensive data stratified by site for w-kenya and zanzibar have  been published elsewhere [29,3027,28].  results  sample characteristics  approximately equal numbers of men and women from urban and rural sites were interviewed in se- drc (n=360), w-kenya (n=379) and zanzibar (n=356). detailed sample characteristics for all three  settings have been presented elsewhere [27,29,31,33]. in summary, the community samples in all  settings were mostly engaged in agriculture (>25%). this occupation was more frequent in the rural  sites except in se-drc, where the rural site was a fishing village. fishing was the major activity of  16.4% in se-drc (only men) and of 7.3% in zanzibar (all men, except one woman), primarily from  the rural sites. self-employment (i.e., informal business, petty trading, etc.) was also an important  occupation reported by more than 17% across all settings. mean age was comparable across settings,  varying between 32.8 and 38.8 years. men were on average older than women in se-drc and  zanzibar, and rural people in w-kenya were older than urban people. average household size was  lowest in w-kenya (mean of 4.5) and higher in se-drc (6.2) and zanzibar (6.8). respondents in w-


  15/35  kenya and se-drc were predominantly christian and respondents in zanzibar they were muslim.  between 69% (zanzibar) and 88% (w-kenya, se-drc) reported to have completed primary or  secondary school. men and urban respondents were better educated across all settings. a reliable  income was reported least in se-drc (35.3%), and higher in w-kenya (47.8%) and zanzibar  (55.9%).  identification, perceived seriousness, fatality and past experience of cholera  the condition described in the cholera vignette was identified as cholera in local terms by 96% of  respondents in se-drc, by 75% in w-kenya and by 88% in zanzibar (p<0.001) (table 1). there  were no gender differences in illness recognition, and only a site difference in se-drc and zanzibar.  almost every respondent in se-drc was afraid of death due to cholera; fewer respondents in w- kenya (50%) and zanzibar (78%) expected a fatal outcome (p<0.001), and reported household  experience with cholera was highest there. cholera was reported as “very serious illness” by more  than eight out of ten respondents in all settings. almost half of the interviewed people in se-drc  (44.4%) reported ever having witnessed a cholera episode within the household episode, and more so  in the urban site. among the 22.4% of respondents reporting this in w-kenya, urban residents and  men were more prevalent; there was no gender difference in se-drc and zanzibar. more rural  residents were among the 15.5% who reported household episodes in zanzibar.  patterns of distress: priority symptoms and psychosocial impact  excluding symptoms that were mentioned in the vignette (i.e., muscle cramps, vomiting, frequent and  large amounts of rice-water-like stool), weakness was identified as the most prominent symptom in all  settings (see additional file 4). unconsciousness (se-drc, zanzibar) and sunken eyes (all three  settings), which are signs of dehydration, were also prominently reported. somatic symptoms were  mainly differentiated between urban and rural sites in se-drc and zanzibar. in se-drc, where  urban community residents have more experience with cholera, signs of dehydration and rectal pain  received greater prominence than in the rural site. in w-kenya, the lack of awareness about additional  symptoms for cholera, coded as “cannot say” for additional symptoms, was significantly higher than  in se-drc and zanzibar, and with a higher prominence in the rural site.  


  16/35    cholera was perceived as having a significant impact on people’s lives in all three settings (table 2).  the social impact of cholera was mainly characterized by financial concerns that were manifested by  people reporting loss of family income and interference with work-related activities in all three  settings, albeit with significantly differing prominences. men in se-drc and zanzibar reported more  negative influences of cholera on the household economy. directin w-kenya, direct costs related to  cholera episodes were not a priority overall, but a distinct urban concern in kenya.   perceived causes  problems with unsafe drinking water and a dirty environment in general, were the most common  perceived causes for cholera in all settings (table 3). however, locally embedded explanations (e.g.,  witchcraft) were still widespread, especially in rural areas (se-drc and zanzibar). lack of latrines  was also a prominent perceived cause in w-kenya (not elicited in zanzibar). there were site- differences in ten out of twelve categories in zanzibar, while only three categories in se-drc and  four categories were reported differently betweenin w-kenya had significant urban and –rural sites in  se-drc and w-kenya, respectively.differences. a dirty environment was more often reported more  in urban sites inof w-kenya and zanzibar, which may reflect conditions that residents are unable to  control. flies were particularly prominent in zanzibar, without differentiation between site and  gender. flies, which can act as disease vectors for cholera, were mostly mentioned in connection with  food handling in zanzibar.  knowledge of prevention and priority of hygiene and sanitation  safe food and water and vaccines were prioritized for prevention in se-drc (table 4). although safe  water was also a priority in w-kenya, respondents in w-kenya and zanzibar identified sanitation  issues (stool and garbage disposal) as priorities for prevention. health education was reported with  equal priority across all settings (p=0.925). differentdiffering ideas on prevention between sites and  between men and women existed mainly in w-kenya, and least often in se-drc. vaccination as a  preference was not reported differently between sites and gender. 


  17/35  help-seeking behavior  use of ors and rehydration in general was a top priority for home-based treatment of cholera  patients in all three settings (table 5). self-administration of drugs was an additional prominent  treatment option in se-drc (mainly antibiotics) and w-kenya (tetracycline and metronidazole  (flagyl®) most frequently mentioned). herbal treatment was the most prominent option in zanzibar,  with a rural preference. less commonly reported practices were praying, which showed a higher  prominence in urban than rural w-kenya, and drinking alcohol. the latter practicecategory, which  was not elicited in the muslim society of zanzibar, was higher among men than women in se-drc  and w-kenya.    health care facilities were universally mentioned in all three settings (table 6), with an urban  preference in w-kenya and zanzibar and a rural preference in se-drc based on the assessment of  the most preferred health provider. other help-seeking practices were far less common: advice from  friends and colleagues was the second most prominent category in w-kenya and zanzibar, also  preferred more by rural and male respondents. visiting pharmacies/or purchasing over-the-counter  drugs was the third most prominent category across all settings; it had the highest priority in w-kenya  and was reported with a significantly higher prominence in rural than in urban zanzibar.  vulnerability to the illness  respondents in se-drc reported cholera as a condition affecting almost everybody (>84%) without  differentiating much between sex, age and class (table 7). this percentage was a little lower in  zanzibar (>74%). respondents in w-kenya differentiated more between women and men and  identified children and the poor as most vulnerable to cholera.  discussion   recognizing that findings are inherently context-specific and people may perceive cholera differently  in their communitiesbased on data from almost 1,100 interviews in three endemic settings, this paper  represents the first systematic study of the nature and distribution of local sociocultural features of  cholera in urban and rural communities at high risk for cholera in three east african countries. 


  18/35  comparing community-reported priorities for cholera in southeastern drc, western kenya and  zanzibar based on data collected from almost 1,100 interviews may be useful to local, national and  regional policy makers and public health professionals when revisiting cholera control policies. the  following findings are especially worthwhile and provide relevant information for local cholera  control strategiesin eastern africa. the following points may be worth considering in planning local  educational activities to increase public awareness of interventions for cholera control, and to advise  communities of practical ways of preventing cholera and managing cases. study findings may also be  used to promote advocacy among decision makers for investment in strategies and action for better  control or elimination of cholera.  implications for regional cholera control policy and action  this study revealed in principleidentified more differences between urban and rural communities than  between men and women across all domains. this is callingsuggests a need for an approach in  program planning that is particularly sensitive to localsetting-specific disparities in all three settings.  findings also indicate that local terms for cholera are recognized and adequately understood in all  settings by over three-quarterquarters of the surveyed populations. use of these terms in  disseminationhealth education and control activities is advisable.    there is a past collective experience and memory of cholera-related symptoms in all settings. in se- drc, where poverty levels are higher and the public health system is weaker compared tothan the  other settings, people rely heavily on social networks since income-generating activities are less  available. thus, social networks may be more important in se-drc (and probably also in drc in  general) in order to meet needs. cholera causes primarily a considerable economic impact in all  settings represented by fears of absence from work or income-generating activities and reported loss  of family income. indirect costs were reported more than direct costs, probably reflecting the fact that  the latter are usually covered by the health care system (during ctcs) or by non-governmental  organizations in all three settings. in zanzibar, laboratory-confirmed cholera patients reported almost  three-quarter of private costs as indirect costs [1719]. differences in costs anticipated between rural 


  19/35  and urban areas (different options for generating income) and genders (men more often generating a  cash income) were not consistent across all settings.    in line with the high recognition of the clinical vignette and the reported severity and help seeking,  infectious pathways of cholera are widely acknowledged, even though local causal explanations  continue to coexist in all settings. the predominance of environmental and sanitation-related factors  and ingestion of contaminated water or food hygiene as perceived causes points to interventions  needed in infrastructure. because of this relatively high overlap between biomedical facts and local  ideas about cholera, future community interventions may preferably address environmental and  infrastructural issues, rather than solely reemphasize education about causes of cholera. it cannot be  ruled out, however, that for those who subscribe to traditional causes like sorcery (primarily in drc),  classical control activities may not be sufficient.     the three settings differ considerably in terms of water supply and sanitation infrastructure. use of  improved drinking water sources (45%) and improved sanitation (24%) was lowest in 2010 in drc  [913]; the same indicators were higher in kenya (59%, 32%) and zanzibar (53%, 53%; numbers for  tanzania). despite this relative variation, but in line with the commonly prioritized environmental and  water and food-related perceived causes, the most prominent prevention options referred to  infrastructural aspects (water and sanitation) in all settings.    similar to the prominence of biomedical meanings, overall help seeking at home reflected a relatively  high awareness about professional cholera treatment in all three settings. rehydration to treat patients  at home was prominently reported in all three settings. antibiotics were the third most prominent  treatment option in se-drc and w-kenya. they were more prominent in rural areas in se-drc and  zanzibar, even though rural villagers are generally poorer and antibiotics have to be purchased. this  may be a consequence of limited access to health facilities in the rural areas, while at the same time  indicating the availability of antibiotics in remote areas. this suggests that future interventions should  primarily focus on rehydration, but also reconsider the role of antibiotics and their potential of being 


  20/35  used inappropriately. antibiotics are part of the treatment regimen as the who recommends  antibiotics for severe cases [5755] (though some recommend it also for moderate cases [5856]), but  indiscriminate use may jeopardize their effectiveness and was shown to induce resistance [5957].  antibiotic use also means out-of-pocket expenditures that may be better used for purchasing ors  packets or salt and sugar for home-made oral rehydration solutions.     herbal treatment, which is still important today for diarrhea management in many african settings  despite westernization and modernization, may potentially conflict with effective cholera treatment.  herbs were among the most important self-help options in rural zanzibar; this may call for more  emphasis about their potential to delay initiation of rehydration and the use of ors. the lower  priority for herbal treatment in se-drc and w-kenya may suggest less attention is needed in that  regard for effective information, health education and communication campaigns.    while limited accessibility to health posts or ctcs may still hinder patients or caretakers from  seeking care for cholera, the consistent and pronounced priority for professional treatment of cholera  across the three settings is another important finding for policy makers in the region. the  underutilization of health services may be explained by various factors, such as distance, perceived  quality of care, competing obligations, recognition of a need for treatment, etc. further study of the  role of these reasons locally would be relevant for cholera control.     because children are most vulnerable to diarrheal diseases and are known to be most affected by  endemic cholera [60], they have been the preferred target group in policy recommendations [61].  results from se-drc and zanzibar, however, show less community priority for the policy of  targeting children; this calls for cholera control activities irrespective of gender and age group. more  definite ideas in w-kenya about the vulnerability of women and children indicate that both groups  need to be targeted for cholera control in this setting.    


  21/35  concerning questions about the vulnerability of some segments of the population to cholera, in  w-kenya respondents were more likely to acknowledge differences. they were consistently less  likely than respondents in the other settings to report “no differentiation,” and they more frequently  identified women or men, adults or children, and the poor as more vulnerable. the findings suggest  both greater cultural sensitivity to vulnerability in general, and a tendency to generalize the  vulnerability of women and children to cholera. respondents at the other settings were less likely to  distinguish the vulnerability of these specific subgroups. in the comparison of se-drc and w-kenya,  this may reflect less access to health services and lower levels of overall development, which affect  everyone. in zanzibar, the finding may reflect less emphasis on vulnerability in health policy. but this  is unclear and the reasons for acknowledging the vulnerability of some groups require further study.  in any case, the relative priority of the needs of the general population and of specific subgroups  requires consideration in cholera control and for strategies to integrate services in the general health  system. acknowledgement of children and pregnant women as high-risk groups that should be  prioritized for cholera vaccines [58] suggest more attention to the relative vulnerability of subgroups  would be appropriate in health education in se-drc and zanzibar.     vaccination has also been recommended by the who as an additional measure to wash in epidemic  and endemic situations [1216]. although no vaccination campaigns have been conducted in the study  sites before the surveys, the use of vaccines for prevention was identified by a majority in all settings  and it received the highest priority in se-drc. vaccine action was a matter of sufficient priority for  the government of zanzibar that it conducted an ocv mass vaccination campaign in 2009. additional  analyses on community demand for oral cholera vaccination confirm a high regard for vaccination  with anticipated acceptance rates above 93% in the three surveys [29-31-33]. while an analysis of  sociocultural determinants of anticipated ocv acceptance across the three settings using meta- analytical techniques is in preparation, the descriptive findings presented here indicate good prospects  for future vaccination campaigns in the region. contrary toit should be noted, however, that a high  acceptability—constituting only one component of access to health (care)—does not directly relate to  a high effectiveness. unlike other multi-country comparisons of people’s ideas about illness and 


  22/35  willingness to receive a hypotheticalnot-yet-existing vaccine [62,6359,60], findings from this study  are directly relevant for public health practice since two. two cholera vaccines are currently available  and plans are being madeprequalified by the who, and planning is underway to increase their use in  populations at risk [6461].    this study is limited by the fact that findings are based on cross-sectional surveys, which do not take  into account the possibility of changes in the studied domains over time. the strengths of this three- country comparison lie in the use of three individual community surveys that were planned and  implemented in a highly consistent manner. all surveys used the same, although locally adapted,  interview schedule; this enabled maximum comparability in the analysis of sociocultural features of  cholera across the three settings.   conclusions  based on this comprehensive review of local understandings of cholera-related diarrhea and priorities  for cholera control in southeastern democratic republic of congo, western kenya and zanzibar, local  program planners are encouraged to intensify cholera control activities in this region. sustainable  cholera control, let alone cholera elimination, is only possible through improvements in the local  water supply and sanitation infrastructure. due to political and economic realities in the region, which  are improving much too slowly, control of cholera continues to depend mostly on response activities  (i.e., ensuring timely rehydration through local treatment centers) in the foreseeable future. this study  indicates that such an approach is likely to be very effective in areas with endemic cholera in eastern  africa. at the same time, regional decision makers aremay also encouraged to consider the  preemptive or reactive use ofusing vaccines in populations at risk of recurrent cholera outbreaks. this  is particularly relevant given the recent renewed international interest in oral cholera vaccines and  plans to ramp up manufacturing capacities. vaccination should serve as an; such intermediate means  to preventactivities would help mitigate morbidity and mortality from cholera while programs for  improving water and sanitation are underway. 


  23/35  competing interests  the authors declare that they have no competing interests.  authors’ contributions  conception and design of the study: cs, ns, sm and mgw. analysis of data: cs, ns and sm.  writing of manuscript: cs, ns, sm and mgw. revision and final approval of manuscript: cs, ns,  sm, sma, eon, bl, clc, rh and mgw.   acknowledgments  we appreciate statistical support provided by christian schindler and leticia grize. we are grateful to  the bill & melinda gates foundation, seattle, usa, for financial support of this comparative study  through a grant to the world health organization. the authors alone are responsible for the views  expressed in this publication and they do not necessarily represent the decisions, policy or views of  the world health organization.  references     1.  echenberg mj: africa in the time of cholera: a history of pandemics from 1817 to the present. new  york: cambridge university press; 2011.   2.  gil ai, louis vr, rivera in, lipp e, huq a, lanata cf, taylor dn, russek-cohen e, choopun n,  sack rb, colwell rr: occurrence and distribution of vibrio cholerae in the coastal environment  of peru. environ microbiol 2004, 6:699-706.   3.  huq a, sack rb, nizam a, longini im, nair gb, ali a, morris jg, jr., khan mn, siddique ak,  yunus m, albert mj, sack da, colwell rr: critical factors influencing the occurrence of vibrio  cholerae in the environment of bangladesh. appl environ microbiol 2005, 71:4645-4654.   4.  harris jb, larocque rc, qadri f, ryan et, calderwood sb: cholera. lancet 2012, 379:2466-2476.   5.  sack da, sack rb, nair gb, siddique ak: cholera. lancet 2004, 363:223-233.   6.  who, global task force on cholera control: first steps for managing an outbreak of acute  diarrhoea. geneva; 2003.   7.  who: cholera: global surveillance summary, 2008. wkly epidemiol rec 2009, 84:309-324.   8.  who: cholera, 2009. wkly epidemiol rec 2010, 85:293-308.   9.  who: cholera, 2010. wkly epidemiol rec 2011, 86:325-340.   10.  cholera fact sheet no 107 (august 2011)  [http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs107/en/index.html]   11.  ali m, lopez al, you ya, kim ye, sah b, maskery b, clemens j: the global burden of cholera.  bull world health organ 2012, 90:209-218a. 


  24/35   12.  zuckerman jn, rombo l, fisch a: the true burden and risk of cholera: implications for  prevention and control. lancet infect dis 2007, 7:521-530.   13.  who/unicef joint monitoring programme for water supply and sanitation: progress on drinking  water and sanitation: 2012 update. new york; 2012.   14.  cholera: mechanism for control and prevention (resolution wha64.15, 24 may 2011)  [http://www.who.int/entity/cholera/technical/resolution_choleraa64_r15-en.pdf]   15.  who: cholera, 2011. wkly epidemiol rec 2012, 87:289-304.   16.  who: cholera vaccines: who position paper. wkly epidemiol rec 2010, 85:117-128.   17.  kirigia jm, sambo lg, yokouide a, soumbey-alley e, muthuri lk, kirigia dg: economic burden  of cholera in the who african region. bmc int health hum rights 2009, 9:8.   18.  poulos c, riewpaiboon a, stewart jf, clemens j, guh s, agtini m, sur d, islam z, lucas m,  whittington d: costs of illness due to endemic cholera. epidemiol infect 2012, 140:500-509.   19.  schaetti c, weiss mg, ali sm, chaignat cl, khatib am, reyburn r, duintjer tebbens rj, hutubessy  r: costs of illness due to cholera, costs of immunization and cost-effectiveness of an oral cholera  mass vaccination campaign in zanzibar. plos negl trop dis 2012, 6:e1844.   20.  mugoya i, kariuki s, galgalo t, njuguna c, omollo j, njoroge j, kalani r, nzioka c, tetteh c,  bedno s, breiman rf, feikin dr: rapid spread of vibrio cholerae o1 throughout kenya, 2005.  am j trop med hyg 2008, 78:527-533.   21.  nations mk, monte cm: "i'm not dog, no!": cries of resistance against cholera control  campaigns. soc sci med 1996, 43:1007-1024.   22.  stanton bf: assessment of relevant cultural considerations is essential for the success of a vaccine.  j health popul nutr 2004, 22:286-292.   23.  williams l, collins ae, bauaze a, edgeworth r: the role of risk perception in reducing cholera  vulnerability. risk management 2010, 12:163-184.   24.  manderson l, aagaard-hansen j, allotey p, gyapong m, sommerfeld j: social research on neglected  diseases of poverty: continuing and emerging themes. plos negl trop dis 2009, 3:e332.   25.  collins ae: vulnerability to coastal cholera ecology. soc sci med 2003, 57:1397-1407.   26.  schaetti c, hutubessy r, ali sm, pach a, weiss mg, chaignat cl, khatib am: oral cholera  vaccine use in zanzibar: socioeconomic and behavioural features affecting demand and  acceptance. bmc public health 2009, 9:99.   27.  schaetti c, khatib am, ali sm, hutubessy r, chaignat cl, weiss mg: social and cultural features  of cholera and shigellosis in peri-urban and rural communities of zanzibar. bmc infect dis 2010,  10:339.   28.  nyambedha eo, sundaram n, schaetti c, akeyo l, chaignat cl, hutubessy r, weiss mg:  distinguishing social and cultural features of cholera in urban and rural areas of western  kenya: implications for public health. glob public health 2013, 8:534-551.   29.  sundaram n, schaetti c, chaignat cl, hutubessy r, nyambedha eo, mbonga la, weiss mg: socio- cultural determinants of anticipated acceptance of an oral cholera vaccine in western kenya.  epidemiol infect 2013, 141:639-650. 


  25/35   30.  schaetti c, chaignat cl, hutubessy r, khatib am, ali sm, schindler c, weiss mg: social and  cultural determinants of anticipated acceptance of an oral cholera vaccine prior to a mass  vaccination campaign in zanzibar. hum vaccin 2011, 7:1299-1308.   31.  merten s, schaetti c, manianga c, lapika b, chaignat cl, hutubessy r, weiss mg: local  perceptions of cholera and anticipated vaccine acceptance in katanga province, democratic  republic of congo. bmc public health 2013, 13:60.   32.  schaetti c, ali sm, chaignat cl, khatib am, hutubessy r, weiss mg: improving community  coverage of oral cholera mass vaccination campaigns: lessons learned in zanzibar. plos one  2012, 7:e41527.   33.  schaetti c, ali sm, hutubessy r, khatib am, chaignat cl, weiss mg: social and cultural  determinants of oral cholera vaccine uptake in zanzibar. hum vaccin immunother 2012, 8:1223- 1229.   34.  bompangue d, giraudoux p, handschumacher p, piarroux m, sudre b, ekwanzala m, kebela i,  piarroux r: lakes as source of cholera outbreaks, democratic republic of congo. emerg infect  dis 2008, 14:798-800.   35.  africhol in the democratic republic of congo (drc) [http://www.africhol.org/country/drc]   36.  rd congo - situation du cholera en 2011 [http://www.rdc-humanitaire.net/index.php/features- mainmenu-48/infographies/1713-rd-congo-situation-du-cholera-en-2011]   37.  bompangue nd, giraudoux p, plisnier pd, tinda am, piarroux m, sudre b, horion s, tamfum jj,  ilunga bk, piarroux r: dynamics of cholera outbreaks in great lakes region of africa, 1978- 2008. emerg infect dis 2011, 17:2026-2034.   38.  user fees in the eastern democratic republic of congo: a barrier to access to health-care. results  of 5 epidemiological surveys: pweto, kabalo, shabunda, baraka, mweso  [http://hdl.handle.net/10144/90301]   39.  piarroux r, bompangue d, oger p-y, haaser f, boinet a, vandevelde t: from research to field  action: example of the fight against cholera in the democratic republic of congo. field actions  sci rep 2009, 2:69-77.   40.  feikin dr, tabu cw, gichuki j: does water hyacinth on east african lakes promote cholera  outbreaks? am j trop med hyg 2010, 83:370-373.   41.  shapiro rl, otieno mr, adcock pm, phillips-howard pa, hawley wa, kumar l, waiyaki p, nahlen  bl, slutsker l: transmission of epidemic vibrio cholerae o1 in rural western kenya associated  with drinking water from lake victoria: an environmental reservoir for cholera? am j trop med  hyg 1999, 60:271-276.   42.  shikanga ot, mutonga d, abade m, amwayi s, ope m, limo h, mintz ed, quick re, breiman rf,  feikin dr: high mortality in a cholera outbreak in western kenya after post-election violence in  2008. am j trop med hyg 2009, 81:1085-1090.   43.  un-habitat: kisumu urban sector profile. nairobi; 2006.   44.  un-habitat: cities without slums: situational analysis of informal settlements in kisumu. nairobi;  2005.   45.  district public health office: cholera report 2007: siaya district. siaya; 2008. 


  26/35   46.  kenya health facilities list  [http://www.ehealth.or.ke/facilities/search.aspx?txtsrch=kakum+kombewa&search.x=0&search.y=0]   47.  cholera country profile: zanzibar (tanzania) (30 november 2006)  [http://www.who.int/entity/cholera/countries/zanzibar%20(tanzania)%20country%20profile.pdf]   48.  reyburn r, deen jl, grais rf, bhattacharya sk, sur d, lopez al, jiddawi ms, clemens jd, von  seidlein l: the case for reactive mass oral cholera vaccinations. plos negl trop dis 2011, 5:e952.   49.  reyburn r, kim dr, emch m, khatib a, von seidlein l, ali m: climate variability and the  outbreaks of cholera in zanzibar, east africa: a time series analysis. am j trop med hyg 2011,  84:862-869.   50.  revolutionary government of zanzibar: health information bulletin 2008. zanzibar; 2009.   51.  revolutionary government of zanzibar: health information bulletin 2009. zanzibar; 2010.   52.  revolutionary government of zanzibar: annual health information bulletin 2010. zanzibar; 2011.   53.  revolutionary government of zanzibar: national guidelines for integrated disease surveillance and  response (idsr). zanzibar; 2007.   54.  weiss mg: explanatory model interview catalogue (emic): framework for comparative study  of illness. transcult psychiatry 1997, 34:235-263.   55.  who: the treatment of diarrhoea: a manual for physicians and other senior health workers. geneva;  2005.   56.  nelson ej, nelson ds, salam ma, sack da: antibiotics for both moderate and severe cholera. n  engl j med 2011, 364:5-7.   57.  dromigny ja, rakoto-alson o, rajaonatahina d, migliani r, ranjalahy j, mauclere p: emergence  and rapid spread of tetracycline-resistant vibrio cholerae strains, madagascar. emerg infect dis  2002, 8:336-338.   58.  who: meeting of the strategic advisory group of experts on immunization, october 2009 -  conclusions and recommendations. wkly epidemiol rec 2009, 84:517-532.   59.  streefland ph: introduction of a hiv vaccine in developing countries: social and cultural  dimensions. vaccine 2003, 21:1304-1309.   60.  pack r, wang y, singh a, von seidlein l, pach a, kaljee l, butraporn p, youlong g, blum l, bhutta  z, santoso ss, trach dd, waluyo i, nyamete a, clemens j, stanton b: willingness to be vaccinated  against shigella and other forms of dysentery: a comparison of three regions in asia. vaccine  2006, 24:485-494.   61.  martin s, costa a, perea w: stockpiling oral cholera vaccine. bull world health organ 2012,  90:714.     


  27/35  tables  table 1 identification, seriousness, fatality and past episodes of cholera in endemic areas of  three african settings   se-drc, n=360 w-kenya, n=379 zanzibar, n=356       a. overall % % %  identification of illnessa *** 96.4 75.2 88.2  seriousnessb *** 81.1 91.3 96.6  expected fatal outcome without treatmentc  *** 99.7 49.9 77.5  past household episodes*** 44.4 22.4 15.5  past personal episodes* 8.3 11.6 5.3             b. site comparison urban rural  p value  urban rural   urban rural   % % % % p value % % p value  identification of illnessa 93.9 98.9 0.020 72.6 77.8 0.285 95.5 80.8 <0.001  seriousnessb 85.6 76.7 0.030 91.6 91.0 0.832 95.0 98.3 0.084  expected fatal outcome without treatmentc 99.4 100.0 0.317 60.0 39.7 <0.001 84.4 70.6 0.002  past household episodes 52.2 36.7 0.004 27.4 17.5 0.044 6.7 24.3 <0.001  past personal episodes 7.7 8.9 0.703 13.2 10.1 0.423 2.8 7.9 0.035             c. gender comparison female male   female male  female male   % % p value % % p value % % p value  identification of illnessa 97.8 95.0 0.170 78.8 71.5 0.122 88.3 88.1 >0.999  seriousnessb 79.0 83.2 0.295 91.2 91.4 0.907 96.1 97.2 0.577  expected fatal outcome without treatmentc 99.5 100.0 0.320 52.9 46.8 0.151 74.9 80.2 0.257  past household episodes 43.1 45.8 0.563 15.5 29.6 0.003 12.9 18.1 0.172  past personal episodes 7.8 8.9 0.680 8.3 15.1 0.053 3.4 7.3 0.104  a identified as cholera in local language based on vignette, b coded as “very serious,” c coded as “usually fatal  without treatment.” panel a: comparison between settings based on chi2 test (identification of illness and  personal episodes) and kruskal wallis test (seriousness, fatality and household episodes), * p<0.05, ***  p<0.001. panels b and c: figures in bold designate significant differences at p<0.05 based on fisher’s exact test  (identification of illness and personal episodes) and wilcoxon test (seriousness, fatality and household  episodes). se-drc: southeastern democratic republic of congo. w-kenya: western kenya.  data for se-drc in panel a from merten et al. [3331]. data for w-kenya in panel b from nyambedha et al.  [30]. [28].    data for zanzibar in panels a and b from schaetti et al. [2927].      


  28/35  table 2 comparison of the psychosocial impact of cholera in endemic areas of three african  settings, by site and gender   se-drc, n=360 w-kenya, n=379 zanzibar, n=356             a. overall total rep. prom.  total rep. prom.  total rep. prom.    interference with  work/daily activities*** 96.9 1.64  98.7 2.19  96.9 2.35   loss of family income*** 92.5 2.41  96.3 2.63  95.5 2.13   sadness, anxiety, worry*** 97.8 2.70  98.2 1.84  97.5 1.89               b. site comparison  urban rural   urban rural   urban rural   total  rep. prom.  total  rep.  prom . p value  total  rep. prom.  total  rep. prom.  p  value  total  rep. prom.  total  rep. prom.  p  value  costs (transport, food,  drugs) 87.8 1.40 94.4 1.42 0.575 97.9 1.51 87.3 1.28 <0.001 97.2 2.07 96.0 1.67 0.142  disruption of health  services 68.9 0.96 71.7 0.84 0.229 55.3 0.57 51.9 0.58 0.627 48.0 0.54 88.1 0.94 <0.001  interference with social  relationships 67.2 1.12 86.7 1.56 <0.001 84.2 1.35 78.8 1.33 0.379 65.4 0.82 74.6 1.28 <0.001  loss of family income 91.1 2.57 93.9 2.25 0.174 97.9 2.94 94.7 2.31 <0.001 98.3 2.11 92.7 2.16 0.463  sadness, anxiety, worry 97.8 2.43 98.3 2.96 <0.001 100.0 1.90 96.3 1.78 0.064 100.0 2.06 94.9 1.72 <0.001             c. gender comparison  female male   female male   female male   total  rep. prom.  total  rep.  prom . p value  total  rep. prom.  total  rep. prom.  p  value  total  rep. prom.  total  rep. prom.  p  value  disruption of health  services 69.6 0.88 70.9 0.92 0.754 46.9 0.47 60.5 0.69 0.004 73.2 0.78 62.7 0.69 0.051  interference with  work/daily activities 95.0 1.46 98.9 1.82 0.005 98.5 2.07 98.9 2.32 0.085 95.5 2.36 97.2 2.33 0.704  loss of family income 94.5 2.55 90.5 2.27 0.112 96.4 2.74 96.2 2.51 0.178 93.9 1.96 97.7 2.31 0.007  categories ordered alphabetically, except for “cannot say.” ‘total rep.’=‘total reported,’ referring to percentage  of categories reported spontaneously and upon probing. ‘prom.’=‘prominence,’ referring to mean prominence of  categories based on how reported (spontaneous=2, probed=1, most troubling=3). panel a: figures in bold  designate top three prominent categories; comparison between settings based on kruskal wallis test, ***  p<0.001. panels b and c: figures in bold designate significant differences at p<0.05 based on wilcoxon test. se- drc: southeastern democratic republic of congo. w-kenya: western kenya.  data for se-drc in panel a from merten et al. [3331]. data for w-kenya in panel b from nyambedha et al.  [30]. [28]. data for zanzibar in panel b from schaetti et al. [2927].      


  29/35  table 3 comparison of perceived causes for cholera in endemic areas of three african settings,  by site and gender   se-drc, n=360 w-kenya, n=379 zanzibar, n=356             a. overall total rep. prom.   total rep. prom.   total rep. prom.    dirty environment*** 93.3 1.83  96.3 1.97  97.8 2.99   drinking contaminated  water*** 94.7 2.68  95.5 2.21  95.2 1.65   eating  unprotected/spoiled  food***  94.7 1.94  93.1 1.75  94.9 1.44    flies* 95.3 1.44  96.0 1.30  96.9 1.60   lack of latrinesa *** 93.3 1.72  95.8 1.79  na na               b. site comparison  urban rural  urban rural  urban rural   total  rep. prom.  total  rep. prom. p value  total  rep. prom.  total  rep. prom. p value  total  rep. prom.  total  rep. prom. p value  contact with  contaminated water 84.4 1.17 89.4 1.12 0.657 55.8 0.64 63.0 0.75 0.115 85.5 1.07 91.0 1.58 <0.001  dirty environment 91.7 1.83 95.0 1.82 0.631 97.9 2.29 94.7 1.63 <0.001 99.4 3.68 96.0 2.30 <0.001  drinking contaminated  water 93.3 2.34 96.1 3.02 <0.001 97.4 2.18 93.7 2.23 0.778 96.1 1.65 94.4 1.66 0.384  eating forbidden food 20.6 0.23 13.3 0.15 0.094 11.6 0.12 14.8 0.15 0.365 27.4 0.27 54.8 0.48 <0.001  eating soil 53.9 0.65 41.7 0.45 0.006 60.0 0.60 52.4 0.52 0.136 36.9 0.37 48.6 0.49 0.023  eating  unprotected/spoiled  food  92.8 1.89 96.7 1.99 0.100 95.3 1.75 91.0 1.74 0.432 95.5 1.60 94.4 1.27 <0.001  flies 93.3 1.37 97.2 1.52 0.236 96.3 1.35 95.8 1.25 0.004 99.4 1.62 94.4 1.58 0.163  god's will 40.0 0.56 42.2 0.55 0.668 8.9 0.09 7.4 0.07 0.586 93.3 1.22 86.4 1.83 0.001  malaria 26.1 0.30 20.0 0.21 0.115 19.5 0.21 24.9 0.25 0.243 15.1 0.15 48.0 0.49 <0.001  witchcraft 47.8 0.64 69.4 0.86 <0.001 9.5 0.09 11.6 0.12 0.494 20.7 0.21 45.8 0.50 <0.001  worms 36.1 0.39 36.7 0.39 0.976 23.2 0.24 39.7 0.40 0.001 13.4 0.13 46.9 0.47 <0.001  cannot say 4.4 0.11 3.9 0.14 0.638 2.1 0.42 11.6 0.77 0.005 1.1 0.02 13.6 0.27 <0.001                   c. gender  comparison  female male  female male  female male   total  rep. prom.  total  rep. prom. p value  total  rep. prom.  total  rep. prom. p value  total  rep. prom.  total  rep. prom. p value  dirty environment 92.3 1.77 94.4 1.89 0.251 96.9 1.84 95.7 2.10 0.043 97.8 2.91 97.7 3.07 0.334  eating soil 51.9 0.61 43.6 0.49 0.092 45.4 0.45 67.6 0.68 <0.001 43.6 0.44 41.8 0.42 0.772  cannot say 5.0 0.15 3.4 0.10 0.620 7.7 0.65 5.9 0.54 0.476 11.2 0.22 3.4 0.07 0.005  categories ordered alphabetically, except for “cannot say.” ‘total rep.’=‘total reported,’ referring to percentage  of categories reported spontaneously and upon probing. ‘prom.’=‘prominence,’ referring to mean prominence of  categories based on how reported (spontaneous=2, probed=1, most important=3). a not elicited in zanzibar.  panel a: figures in bold designate top three prominent categories; comparison between settings based on  kruskal wallis test, * p<0.05, *** p<0.001. panels b and c: figures in bold designate significant differences at  p<0.05 based on wilcoxon test. se-drc: southeastern democratic republic of congo. w-kenya: western  kenya. 


  30/35  data for se-drc in panel a from merten et al. [3331]. data for w-kenya in panel b from nyambedha et al.  [30]. [28]. data for zanzibar in panel b from schaetti et al. [2927].


  31/35  table 4 comparison of prevention options for cholera in endemic areas of three african  settings, by site and gender    se-drc, n=360 w-kenya, n=379 zanzibar, n=354             a. overall total rep. prom.   total rep. prom.   total rep. prom.    health education 92.5 1.75  98.9 1.89  95.5 1.90   safe disposal of  garbage*** 95.0 1.79  97.9 1.61  98.6 2.09   safe disposal of  stool*** 93.9 1.53  97.9 1.81  98.3 2.09   safe food*** 95.3 1.92  98.4 1.67  97.5 1.66   safe water*** 93.3 2.06  98.2 1.93  96.9 1.74   vaccines*** 87.2 2.00  87.9 1.15  86.2 1.20               b. site comparison urban rural   urban rural  urban rural   total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value  health education 90.0 1.80 95.0 1.71 0.371 98.9 2.27 98.9 1.51 <0.001 96.6 1.93 94.3 1.88 0.581  preventive drugs 59.4 0.87 65.0 1.04 0.331 86.3 1.05 91.5 1.20 0.049 83.7 1.01 88.6 1.18 0.040  protection from  supernatural influencea 10.6 0.13 5.0 0.05 0.047 7.4 0.09 21.7 0.22 <0.001 na na na na na  safe disposal of  garbage 93.9 1.71 96.1 1.87 0.154 98.4 1.53 97.4 1.69 0.257 99.4 2.51 97.7 1.66 <0.001  safe disposal of stool 91.7 1.53 96.1 1.54 0.911 97.4 1.66 98.4 1.96 0.026 99.4 1.96 97.2 2.21 0.301  safe food 94.4 1.86 96.1 1.98 0.298 98.9 1.76 97.9 1.58 0.002 98.3 1.78 96.6 1.53 0.001                   c. gender comparison female male   female male  female male   total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value  health education 91.7 1.66 93.3 1.84 0.361 98.5 1.87 99.5 1.92 0.571 95.5 1.72 95.4 2.10 0.014  protection from  supernatural influencea 5.0 0.05 10.6 0.13 0.044 13.4 0.14 15.7 0.17 0.533 na na na na na  safe disposal of  garbage 95.6 1.78 94.4 1.79 0.500 97.4 1.52 98.4 1.70 0.026 98.9 2.13 98.3 2.05 0.906  safe food 94.5 1.98 96.1 1.86 0.206 98.5 1.69 98.4 1.65 0.888 98.3 1.78 96.6 1.53 0.013  safe water 92.3 2.15 94.4 1.98 0.159 98.5 2.04 97.8 1.82 0.019 97.2 1.77 96.6 1.71 0.926  categories ordered alphabetically. ‘total rep.’=‘total reported,’ referring to percentage of categories reported  spontaneously and upon probing. ‘prom.’=‘prominence,’ referring to mean prominence of categories based on  how reported (spontaneous=2, probed=1, most useful=3). a not elicited in zanzibar. panel a: figures in bold  designate top three prominent categories; comparison between settings based on kruskal wallis test, ***  p<0.001. panels b and c: figures in bold designate significant differences at p<0.05 based on wilcoxon test. se- drc: southeastern democratic republic of congo. w-kenya: western kenya.  data for se-drc in panel a from merten et al. [3331]. data for w-kenya in panel b from nyambedha et al.  [3028]. 


  32/35  table 5 comparison of home-based self-treatment options for cholera in endemic areas of three  african settings, by site and gender   se-drc, n=360 w-kenya, n=379 zanzibar, n=356             a. overall total rep. prom.   total rep. prom.   total rep. prom.    drinking water/liquids*** 55.6 0.86  89.4 2.00  69.1 1.32   herbal treatment*** 50.3 0.84  33.2 0.62  66.3 1.79   ors*** 92.8 3.26  87.1 2.20  66.3 1.45   self-administered drugs*** 56.1 1.19  73.9 1.89  58.4 1.30               b. site comparison urban rural   urban rural  urban rural   total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value  doing nothing at home 5.6 0.09 10.6 0.24 0.109 0.5 0.03 5.3 0.12 0.020 27.9 1.25 19.8 0.53 0.005  drinking water/liquids 66.7 1.07 44.4 0.64 <0.001 87.9 1.93 91.0 2.07 0.493 68.7 1.58 69.5 1.05 0.006  herbal treatment 50.0 0.79 50.6 0.89 0.912 30.0 0.61 36.5 0.63 0.292 49.7 1.29 83.1 2.31 <0.001  prayers 44.4 0.80 50.6 0.74 0.497 51.1 0.68 32.3 0.37 <0.001 55.9 0.74 47.5 0.73 0.229  self-administered drugs 48.3 1.03 63.9 1.36 0.006 76.8 1.95 70.9 1.83 0.251 44.7 1.03 72.3 1.57 <0.001                   c. gender comparison female male   female male  female male   total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value  alcoholic drinka 4.4 0.05 11.2 0.12 0.019 4.1 0.06 10.8 0.14 0.014 na na na na na  herbal treatment 47.0 0.78 53.6 0.91 0.147 25.8 0.42 41.1 0.83 0.001 70.9 1.92 61.6 1.67 0.149  ors 91.7 3.27 93.9 3.26 0.790 90.2 2.38 83.8 2.01 0.017 65.4 1.36 67.2 1.53 0.492  self-administered drugs 50.3 1.07 62.0 1.32 0.023 69.6 1.87 78.4 1.91 0.585 61.5 1.35 55.4 1.25 0.363  categories ordered alphabetically. ‘total rep.’=‘total reported,’ referring to percentage of categories reported  spontaneously and upon probing. ‘prom.’=‘prominence,’ referring to mean prominence of categories based on  how reported (spontaneous=2, probed=1, most helpful=3). a not elicited in zanzibar. panel a: figures in bold  designate top three prominent categories; comparison between settings based on kruskal wallis test, ***  p<0.001. panels b and c: figures in bold designate significant differences at p<0.05 based on wilcoxon test. se- drc: southeastern democratic republic of congo. w-kenya: western kenya. ors: oral rehydration solution.  data for se-drc in panel a from merten et al. [3331]. data for w-kenya in panel b from nyambedha et al.  [30]. [28]. data for zanzibar in panel b from schaetti et al. [2927].  


  33/35  table 6 comparison of outside help-seeking options for cholera in endemic areas of three  african settings, by site and gender   se-drc, n=360 w-kenya, n=379 zanzibar, n=356             a. overall total rep. prom.   total rep. prom.   total rep. prom.    faith healers 19.4 0.31  18.5 0.23  14.9 0.18   health care facility 100.0 4.79  100.0 4.76  100.0 4.64   informal help*** 13.6 0.18  54.6 0.72  55.9 0.86   pharmacy/otc*** 19.4 0.20  59.1 0.70  34.0 0.36               b. site comparison urban rural  urban rural   urban rural   total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value  health care facility 100.0 4.69 100.0 4.90 0.001 100.0 4.87 99.5 4.65 0.005 100.0 4.87 100.0 4.41 <0.001  informal help 15.6 0.22 11.7 0.13 0.263 44.2 0.54 65.1 0.90 <0.001 38.5 0.52 73.4 1.21 <0.001  pharmacy/otc 20.6 0.22 18.3 0.18 0.546 55.3 0.61 63.0 0.79 0.072 27.4 0.27 40.7 0.44 0.007  traditional healers 9.4 0.14 4.4 0.09 0.075 12.1 0.16 17.5 0.19 0.187 3.9 0.04 9.6 0.12 0.031                    c. gender comparison female male  female male   female male   total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value total rep. prom. total rep. prom. p value  health care facility 100.0 4.77 100.0 4.82 0.976 100.0 4.79 100.0 4.72 0.475 100.0 4.77 100.0 4.51 0.013  informal help 10.5 0.12 16.8 0.23 0.078 49.5 0.62 60.0 0.83 0.026 50.8 0.69 61.0 1.03 0.014  traditional healers 5.0 0.08 8.9 0.15 0.159 10.3 0.12 19.5 0.22 0.014 7.8 0.08 5.6 0.07 0.418  categories ordered alphabetically. ‘total rep.’=‘total reported,’ referring to percentage of categories reported  spontaneously and upon probing. ‘prom.’=‘prominence,’ referring to mean prominence of categories based on  how reported (spontaneous=2, probed=1, most helpful=3). a not elicited in zanzibar. panel a: figures in bold  designate top three prominent categories; comparison between settings based on kruskal wallis test, ***  p<0.001. panels b and c: figures in bold designate significant differences at p<0.05 based on wilcoxon test. se- drc: southeastern democratic republic of congo. w-kenya: western kenya. otc: over-the-counter drugs.  data for se-drc in panel a from merten et al. [3331]. data for w-kenya in panel b from nyambedha et al.  [30]. [28]. data for zanzibar in panel b from schaetti et al. [2927].  


  34/35  table 7 perceived vulnerability to cholera in endemic areas of three african settings    se-drc, n=360 w-kenya, n=379 zanzibar, n=356    % % %  sex     no differentiation 90.6 63.6 87.1  women more vulnerable 6.9 24.5 10.4  men more vulnerable 2.5 11.9 2.5  age     no differentiation 84.4 26.9 79.5  adults more vulnerable 8.1 22.4 8.1  children more vulnerable 7.5 50.7 12.4  class     no differentiation 86.3 44.9 74.4  rich more vulnerable 0.6 2.9 0.0  poor more vulnerable 13.1 52.2 25.6  se-drc: southeastern democratic republic of congo. w-kenya: western kenya.


  35/35  additional files  file name: additional file 1  format: pdf document  title: emic interview for study of community views of cholera in southeastern democratic republic  of congo.  description: interview    file name: additional file 2  format: pdf document  title: emic interview for study of community views of cholera in western kenya.  description: interview     file name: additional file 3  format: pdf document  title: emic interview for study of community views of cholera in zanzibar.  description: interview    file name: additional file 4  format: pdf document  title: comparison of priority symptoms for cholera in endemic areas of three african settings, by site  and gender.  description: table 


additional files provided with this submission: additional file 1: additional file 1.pdf, 212k http://www.biomedcentral.com/imedia/1469685421941418/supp1.pdf additional file 2: additional file 2.pdf, 112k http://www.biomedcentral.com/imedia/7192286769414187/supp2.pdf additional file 3: additional file 3.pdf, 131k http://www.biomedcentral.com/imedia/1426867495941418/supp3.pdf additional file 4: additional file 4_rev1.docx, 34k http://www.biomedcentral.com/imedia/6774687091033318/supp4.docx
