

a randomised controlled trial of an intervention to facilitate the implementation of healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices in childcare services jannah jones,1,2,3,4 luke wolfenden,1,2,3,4 rebecca wyse,1,2,3,4 meghan finch,1,2,3,4 sze lin yoong,2,3,4 pennie dodds,2,3 nicole pond,1,3 karen gillham,1,3 megan freund,1,2,3,4 patrick mcelduff,2 paula wye,1,2,3 john wiggers1,2,3,4 to cite: jones j, wolfenden l, wyse r, et al. a randomised controlled trial of an intervention to facilitate the implementation of healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices in childcare services. bmj open 2014;4:e005312. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014- 005312 ▸ prepublication history for this paper is available online. to view these files please visit the journal online (http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ bmjopen-2014-005312). received 21 march 2014 accepted 27 march 2014 for numbered affiliations see end of article. correspondence to jannah jones; jannah.jones@ hnehealth.nsw.gov.au abstract introduction: childhood overweight and obesity tracks into adulthood, increasing the risk of developing future chronic disease. implementing initiatives promoting healthy eating and physical activity in childcare settings has been identified as a priority to prevent excessive child weight gain. despite this, few trials have been conducted to assess the effectiveness of interventions to support population-wide implementation of such initiatives. the aim of this study is to assess the effectiveness of a multicomponent intervention in increasing the implementation of healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices by centre-based childcare services. methods and analysis: the study will employ a parallel group randomised controlled trial design. a sample of 128 childcare services in the hunter region of new south wales, australia, will be recruited to participate in the trial. 64 services will be randomly allocated to a 12-month implementation intervention. the remaining 64 services will be allocated to a usual care control group. the intervention will consist of a number of strategies to facilitate childcare service implementation of healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices. intervention strategies will include implementation support staff, securing executive support, consensus processes, staff training, academic detailing visits, performance monitoring and feedback, tools and resources, and a communications strategy. the primary outcome of the trial will be the prevalence of services implementing all healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices targeted by the intervention. to assess the effectiveness of the intervention, telephone surveys with nominated supervisors and room leaders of childcare services will be conducted at baseline and immediately postintervention. ethics and dissemination: the study was approved by the hunter new england human research ethics committee and the university of newcastle human research ethics committee. study findings will be disseminated widely through peer-reviewed publications and conference presentations. trial registration number: australian clinical trials registry actrn12612000927820. introduction globally the prevalence of child overweight and obesity is increasing, with 9% of children aged 0–5 years expected to be overweight or obese by the year 2020.1 overweight and obesity in childhood tracks into adulthood,2 increasing the risk of developing a number of chronic health conditions. given early childhood represents a critical period in the development of diet and physical activity behaviours, interventions that aim to improve such behaviours have been recom- mended to prevent the onset of obesity among young children.3–7 childcare services have been identiﬁed as a key setting to create environments supportive of child healthy eating and physical activity.8 strengths and limitations of this study ▪ the study has a strong design incorporating random allocation and blinding of data collection interviewers. ▪ the intervention consists of a broad set of inter- vention strategies and is based on a theoretical framework and past research evidence. ▪ the study is one of only a handful of randomised trials of such interventions internationally, and the first of its kind in australia. jones j, wolfenden l, wyse r, et al. bmj open 2014;4:e005312. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005312 1 open access protocol group.bmj.com on august 14, 2015 - published by http://bmjopen.bmj.com/downloaded from 


in developed countries, childcare services provide access to a large and growing number of children for prolonged periods each day.8–11 evidence from randomised and quasi-experimental trials suggests that healthy eating and physical activity promoting policies and practices can increase time children spend being physically active, improve child fundamental movement skill proﬁciency, improve child diet quality in care and prevent excessive weight gain.12–15 as such, licensing and accreditation requirements and best practice guidelines for the child- care setting recommend that services implement a number of policies and practices to support healthy eating and physical activity.16–21 despite such evidence and recommendations from best practice guidelines, childcare service implementa- tion of healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices appears to be limited internationally17 and within australia.22 australian research, for example, sug- gests that just 48–50% of centre-based childcare services have a written physical activity policy, 46–60% pro- gramme time each day for fundamental movement skill development, while 25–28% provide opportunities each day for children to participate in sedentary screen time,22 and 60% of australian preschooler lunchboxes contain more than one serve of high fat, salt or sugar foods or drinks.23 without adequate implementation, the potential public health beneﬁts of interventions to prevent child- hood overweight and obesity in childcare services will not be realised. an agency for healthcare research and quality systematic review, however, identiﬁed no trials examining the effectiveness of interventions to improve childcare service implementation of healthy eating and physical activity promoting policies and practices.24 further, trials published since the review search period have reported non-signiﬁcant improvements or improve- ments in only a minority of healthy eating or physical activity policies of practices targeted by the interven- tion.13 14 25–27 previous trials have also utilised a narrow set of implementation strategies (eg, workforce develop- ment and resource provision)14 28 or developed interven- tions without the guidance of conceptual or theoretical frameworks,13 28 limiting their potential effectiveness. finally, most previous trials have been conducted on small numbers of childcare services (less than 20) limit- ing their capacity to guide approaches aimed at achieving population-level service improvements.27 28 given the limitations of the existing evidence base, a randomised trial of a theoretically based, multicompo- nent implementation intervention to increase the imple- mentation of healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices in childcare services in australia will be conducted. this paper describes the protocol by which this trial will be conducted. methods and analysis study aim the aim of this study is to assess the effectiveness of mul- ticomponent intervention in increasing the implementa- tion of healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices by centre-based childcare services. study design the study will employ a parallel group randomised con- trolled trial design (see ﬁgure 1). a sample of eligible childcare services in the study region will be randomly selected and invited to participate in the trial. sixty-four figure 1 consort flow diagram estimating the progress of childcare services through the trial. 2 jones j, wolfenden l, wyse r, et al. bmj open 2014;4:e005312. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005312 open access group.bmj.com on august 14, 2015 - published by http://bmjopen.bmj.com/downloaded from 


services will be allocated to receive a 12-month imple- mentation intervention, and 64 services will be allocated to receive usual care and will serve as a control group. to assess the effectiveness of the intervention, across each service, surveys administered via computer assisted telephone interview (cati) will be conducted with the nominated supervisor (service manager) and room leader (room supervisor) caring for children 3–5 years. the surveys will be conducted at baseline and immedi- ately postintervention. cati interviewers will be blind to group allocation. the research will be reported in accordance with the requirements of consort statement.29 the trial is funded by the australian national preventive health agency (reference: 95wol2011) with in-kind support for the trial provided by hunter new england population health. research setting the study will take place in the hunter region of new south wales, australia. the region encompasses non- metropolitan ‘major cities’ and ‘inner regional’ areas as described by the australian statistical geography standard.30 there are 586 000 people residing in the area, of which 23 000 are children aged 3–5 years.31 32 approximately 3% of residents are of aboriginal or torres strait islander origin and 4% speak languages other than english.31 32 the hunter region has lower indices of socioeconomic status than the new south wales state average.31 32 sample childcare services for the purpose of the study, centre-based childcare ser- vices include preschools and long day care services. more than 60% of australian children aged 3–5 years attend preschool or long day care.11 in new south wales, preschools provide centre-based care for 6–8 h/ day and enrol children aged between 3–6 years. long day care services provide centre-based care for eight or more hours per day and usually enrol children aged from 6 weeks up to 6 years. both types of services provide speciﬁc programmes for children aged 3–5 years that include educational and developmental activities to assist children in their preparation for school.33 across australian states and territories, the role and function of preschools and long day care services are similar and licensing and accreditation requirements regarding healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices are identical.21 physical activity policies and practices are similar across both service types.22 in 2012, there were over 250 centre-based childcare services in the study region. a current list of all childcare services in the region provided by the new south wales ministry of health will serve as the sampling frame for the study. services catering exclusively for children requiring specialist care will be excluded from the trial (representing less than 1% of services in the region), as will services that provide on-site meals to children (representing approximately 30% of services in the region). government funded, department of education services (representing approximately 3% of services in the region) will also be excluded as ethics approval has not been obtained from the relevant government department. nominated supervisors and room leaders within participating childcare services, nominated supervisors and room leaders will be invited to partici- pate in cati surveys to assess the effectiveness of the intervention. the nominated supervisor is the person responsible for the management of the service and will be asked to report on the implementation of whole-of-service policies and practices. the room leader caring for 3–5-year-old children is the head teacher of the classroom and will be asked to report on the imple- mentation of speciﬁc healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices within their room. where there are more than one nominated supervisors or room leaders within a service, a member of the research team will randomly select one staff member to be invited to participate by requesting the staff member with the most recent birthday. there are no exclusion criteria for nominated supervisor or room leader participation. recruitment procedures in order to maximise service participation in the study, a recruitment strategy will be employed based on a review of effective recruitment practices within the school setting34 which has also been successfully executed in childcare settings by the research team.35–37 speciﬁcally, one member of the research team will act as a dedicated recruitment coordinator. the coordinator will manage the recruitment of services into the trial and monitor consent rates. services will be provided with the direct phone number of the coordinator for enquiries regard- ing the research. study information will be mailed to childcare services inviting participation in the study. nominated supervisors will be invited to provide consent for their service participation in the study, consent for their participation in a cati survey and consent to contact a room leader to participate in a cati survey. two weeks after receipt of the information, nominated supervisors and room leaders will be telephoned by a research assistant who will conﬁrm eligibility, invite study participation and schedule a time to conduct the base- line cati surveys. to minimise attrition, prior to follow-up data collection, services will receive letters thanking them for their participation to date and reminding them that they will be telephoned again to participate in follow-up data collection.38 random allocation of childcare services following the completion of baseline data collection, childcare services will be randomly allocated to either the intervention or control condition using a jones j, wolfenden l, wyse r, et al. bmj open 2014;4:e005312. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005312 3 open access group.bmj.com on august 14, 2015 - published by http://bmjopen.bmj.com/downloaded from 


computerised random number function in microsoft excel. allocation of services will be undertaken by a stat- istician who will have no other involvement in the trial. the random allocation of childcare services will not be stratiﬁed, given previous studies have found only slight differences in implementation of healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices by service type (preschool or long day care service), size or the socio- economic or geographic characteristics of the service locality.22 services will be randomised in a 1:1 (interven- tion:control) ratio. owing to the difﬁculty in blinding services to their group allocation, this trial will be an ‘open’ trial and services will not be blind to study allocation. intervention implementation intervention the intervention was designed by an expert advisory group of health promotion practitioners, psychologists, dietitians, behavioural scientists and physical activity experts, in consultation with nominated supervisors from local childcare services. the intervention will seek to increase service imple- mentation of healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices. the policies and practices are consistent with best practice australian healthy eating and physical activity guidelines for the childcare setting,39 40 and evi- dence reviews of policies and practices shown to be asso- ciated with child healthy eating and physical activity.17 19 speciﬁcally the intervention will target the implementa- tion of the policies and practices described in the mea- sures section. intervention strategies the intervention will consist of a number of strategies to facilitate childcare service implementation of healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices. the strategies to support implementation have been devel- oped to address identiﬁed barriers reported by childcare service staff to implementing health promoting policies and practices.41 the effectiveness of the intervention components are supported by reviews of implementation and practice change interventions,42–45 and are consist- ent with recommendations for scaling up health programmes.46 speciﬁcally, the intervention will include the following strategies: 1. implementation support staff47: each service will be allo- cated an individual implementation support staff member who will provide ongoing implementation support and positive reinforcement to the service during the 12-month intervention. support will be provided via face-to-face visits, telephone and email contacts.47 each contact will draw on continuous quality improvement principles to review progress, provide positive reinforcement and facilitate reﬂec- tion, problem solving, goal setting and action plan- ning.47 48 services will be allocated to staff members at a ratio of 20 services for every one full-time equiva- lent staff member. 2. securing executive support49: to secure executive support and leadership, the importance and beneﬁts of implementing healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices will be communicated by implementation support staff to nominated supervi- sors during telephone contact, face-to-face meetings, training workshops, service visits and newsletters.49 nominated supervisors will be supported to monitor the implementation of policies and practices and will be asked to demonstrate leadership and managerial support, by leading the development and implemen- tation of nutrition and physical activity policies, com- municating expectations to childcare service staff during staff meetings, cofacilitating training work- shops with implementation support staff and partici- pating in consensus processes during staff training workshops. such factors have been associated with implementation success.48–50 3. employment of consensus processes45 51 52: consensus pro- cesses will be employed to reduce childcare service staff resistance to policy and practice change by resolving any discrepancies between existing standards and expectations of childcare service staff.51 a consensus process will occur following each staff training work- shop where implementation support staff will facilitate a discussion involving nominated supervisors and child- care service staff, to reach agreement and a group deci- sion regarding an implementation strategy for the targeted policies and practices.51 the discussion will involve all childcare service staff and will allow for sharing of information, group goal setting, problem solving of barriers that may impede implementation and action planning.45 51 52 4. provision of staff training53: a series of three 1 h train- ing workshops will be provided to childcare service staff at their service, typically outside of operating hours. the workshops will introduce key healthy eating and physical activity intervention messages and will focus on introducing and supporting the imple- mentation of the healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices. the workshops will combine didactic and interactive components, including opportunities to practice new skills and to role-play, have group discussions, discuss case studies and receive facilitator provided feedback, as such ele- ments have been suggested to be more effective than didactic education alone.45 53–55 training workshops will be facilitated by experienced implementation support staff with expertise in early childhood educa- tion and health promotion and will be tailored to address the speciﬁc policies or practices that child- care services are not currently implementing. 5. provision of academic detailing visits48 56: on three occa- sions following each training workshop, implementa- tion support staff will conduct academic detailing visits with childcare service staff at their service. the 4 jones j, wolfenden l, wyse r, et al. bmj open 2014;4:e005312. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005312 open access group.bmj.com on august 14, 2015 - published by http://bmjopen.bmj.com/downloaded from 


visits will draw on the principles of academic detail- ing outlined by soumerai and avon48 and will involve support staff observing childcare service staff imple- mentation of practices targeted by the intervention. during the visits, implementation support staff will provide immediate feedback based on observations of practice regarding policy or practice implementa- tion, provide further advice or support as required and reinforce observed practice improvements. subsequent visits will be similarly structured by tailor- ing based on the policies and practices that services are having difﬁculty implementing.56 6. provision of tools and resources47: all services will receive a package of tools and resources to support and sufﬁ- ciently equip childcare service staff to implement the healthy eating and physical activity policies and prac- tices. the resources were reviewed by local nomi- nated supervisors and childcare service staff to ensure that they are relevant, attractive and user friendly in order to increase the likelihood of use.47 speciﬁcally the resource package includes an imple- mentation manual, policy templates, reﬂection and goal-setting document, self-assessment forms, a dvd with age appropriate physical activity games to encourage the development of fundamental move- ment skills, lanyards to be worn by childcare service staff during outdoor play with pictures and instruc- tions for each fundamental movement skill, healthy food guideline posters and parent lunchbox resources. resources will be provided to services in electronic and hard copy forms. 7. provision of performance monitoring and feedback57 58: performance feedback will be delivered by imple- mentation support staff to nominated supervisors and childcare service staff members. data for the per- formance feedback will be compiled initially using information collected via the baseline cati and thereafter project records maintained by implemen- tation support staff. feedback will describe individual service progress towards implementation of the tar- geted healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices at six intervals throughout the 12-month intervention. feedback will be provided in written, graphic and verbal modalities.57 58 in order to maxi- mise the effectiveness of this strategy, performance will be compared against agreed benchmarks and the performance of all services receiving the interven- tion. action plans will be negotiated with services to facilitate further performance improvement.57 8. employment of a communications strategy59: services will receive bimonthly printed newsletters which will com- municate key messages relating to the healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices.59 the newsletters will case study individual services which have undertaken successful and innovative approaches to implementation, and include content to help overcome key implementation barriers. services that demonstrate achievement of all healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices will also receive a certiﬁcate of recognition and will be promoted to other services through newsletters and staff training workshops.47 nominated supervisors will also be able to nominate individual childcare service staff members who demonstrate signiﬁcant achieve- ment towards the key policies and practices for a cer- tiﬁcate of recognition. theoretical perspective the use of comprehensive theoretical frameworks, par- ticularly those operating at multiple levels within complex systems, has been recommended to guide the development of implementation interventions.24 given the lack of evidence for the effectiveness of theoretical frameworks for community-based implementation inter- ventions,24 the intervention draws on implementation theory previously utilised in clinical settings.24 speciﬁcally, the intervention draws on damschroder’s consolidated framework for implementation research.60 the framework integrates 19 theoretical models and is composed of ﬁve major domains identiﬁed as inﬂuen- tial in successful intervention implementation: inter- vention characteristics, outer setting, inner setting, characteristics of the individuals involved and the process of implementation. the constructs contained within the ﬁve domains of the consolidated framework for implementation research and the application of the relevant constructs to the intervention are described in table 1. intervention personnel, training, supervision and monitoring implementation support staff will attend a 2-day training workshop which will focus on equipping staff with sufﬁ- cient knowledge and skills to deliver the intervention. intervention delivery will be overseen by a project manager. all implementation support staff will partici- pate in fortnightly group meetings, where a self- regulatory model of peer supervision will be utilised to facilitate learning, improve staff performance and help standardise intervention delivery.61 project records will be maintained by implementation support staff and will be used to monitor intervention delivery according to the protocol. such staff will also have access to dietitians, psychologists and childcare service staff for specialist advice and support. control group participating services randomised to the control group will not receive any intervention by the research team during the study period. data collection procedures baseline and follow-up data will be collected through two cati surveys—one administered to the nominated supervisor and one administered to the room leader caring for 3–5-year-old children at all participating ser- vices. similar surveys have been used previously by the jones j, wolfenden l, wyse r, et al. bmj open 2014;4:e005312. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005312 5 open access group.bmj.com on august 14, 2015 - published by http://bmjopen.bmj.com/downloaded from 


table 1 application of the consolidated framework for implementation research construct application to intervention intervention characteristics: characteristics of the healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices intervention source: was the intervention developed internally by childcare services or by external agencies? the intervention was designed externally by an expert advisory group of health promotion practitioners, psychologists, dietitians, behavioural scientists and physical activity experts, in consultation with nominated supervisors from local childcare services. components of the intervention (including staff training workshops and the tools and resources) will be pilot tested with childcare services prior to implementation evidence strength and quality: what are the nominated supervisor’s and childcare service staff’s perceptions of the strength and quality of evidence that the intervention will have the intended outcomes? there is strong evidence to support childcare services as a setting to create environments more supportive of child healthy eating and physical activity. the strength of evidence will be communicated to childcare service staff during telephone contact, face-to-face meetings, training workshops, service visits and newsletters. policies and practices are consistent with licensing and accreditation requirements and evidence-based best practice guidelines for the childcare setting adaptability: is the intervention able to be adapted or tailored to meet the needs of the childcare service? staff training workshops will be tailored to meet service needs based on the policies and practices not being implemented at baseline. implementation support staff will employ consensus processes regarding how to implement policies and practices that best suit the service needs. advice on the use of tools and resources will be tailored based on identified barriers to changing healthy eating and physical activity policy and practice complexity: what are the nominated supervisor’s and childcare service staff’s perceptions of implementation difficulty? healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices endorsed by the intervention are consistent with existing licensing and accreditation requirements for the setting. support will focus on integrating policies and practices into existing service routines to reduce the burden on childcare service staff. this will be communicated to childcare service staff during telephone contact, face-to-face meetings, training workshops, service visits and newsletters design quality and packaging: what are the nominated supervisor’s and childcare service staff’s perceptions of how the intervention is presented? tools and resources will be reviewed by nominated supervisors and childcare service staff to ensure that they are professionally presented, attractive and user friendly. newsletters will be bright and visually appealing cost: what are the costs of the intervention and associated implementation? the intervention will be provided to childcare services at no cost. this will be communicated to childcare service staff during telephone contact, face-to-face meetings, training workshops, service visits and newsletters outer setting: the economic, political and social context within which the childcare service operates peer pressure: is there competitive pressure to implement the intervention? successful implementation of all policies and practices by childcare services will be communicated to other intervention services using a communications strategy. individual service performance will be compared against the performance of all services receiving the intervention to permit peer comparison external policy and incentives: what are the external strategies to spread the intervention (including policy and regulations, external mandates, recommendations and guidelines)? policies and practices are consistent with licensing and accreditation requirements and evidence-based best practice guidelines for the childcare setting. the use of continuous quality improvement principles during support contacts aligns with external policy and accreditation requirements for the childcare setting continued 6 jones j, wolfenden l, wyse r, et al. bmj open 2014;4:e005312. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005312 open access group.bmj.com on august 14, 2015 - published by http://bmjopen.bmj.com/downloaded from 


research team to assess the policies and practices of childcare services.22 25 35 the cati survey will take approximately 15–25 min to complete. cati interviewers will be provided with training to ensure they understand and adhere to data collection protocols. interviewers will also be required to practice the survey script prior to administration. interviewers will not participate in the delivery of the intervention and will be blind to service group allocation. baseline data will be collected 1–2 months prior to start of intervention delivery. the survey administered at baseline will be repeated immediately postintervention. table 1 continued construct application to intervention inner setting: the childcare service structural, political and cultural contexts through which the implementation process will proceed tension for change: do the nominated supervisor and childcare service staff perceive the current situation as needing to change? the need for change will be explored during consensus processes, communicated to childcare service staff through newsletters via presentation of data and advocated by implementation support staff at training workshops and other service contacts relative priority: do childcare service staff have a shared perception of the importance of implementation within the childcare service? nominated supervisors will communicate to childcare service staff that implementation of the targeted policies and practices represent an organisational priority during training workshops and staff meetings and via the development and endorsement of supportive policy organisational incentives and rewards: does the intervention include incentives such as goal-sharing awards, performance reviews, increased stature? services that demonstrate achievement of all policies and practices will receive a certificate of recognition and will be promoted to other intervention services in newsletters and through training workshops goals and feedback: are goals clearly communicated, acted on and fed back to nominated supervisor and childcare service staff? implementation support staff contacts with childcare service staff will draw on continuous quality improvement principles to review progress, provide positive reinforcement, discuss deficits identified from self-monitoring and facilitate reflection, problem solving, goal setting and action. furthermore, performance feedback will be provided to services regarding achievement of key implementation goals leadership engagement: are nominated supervisors committed, involved and accountable for the implementation? nominated supervisors and management committees will be engaged and encouraged to communicate their endorsement of practice changes to childcare service staff during staff meetings, training workshops and via the consensus processes. performance feedback reports will be circulated to management committees and childcare service staff access to information and knowledge: how easy is it for childcare service staff to access information and knowledge about the intervention and how to incorporate it into work tasks? nominated supervisors and childcare service staff will receive resources and ongoing support from implementation support staff via face-to-face meetings, telephone and email. services will also be able to contact implementation support staff at any time for advice or assistance characteristics of individuals: characteristics of childcare service staff knowledge and beliefs about the intervention: what are the nominated supervisor and childcare service staff attitudes towards the intervention? beliefs of nominated supervisors and childcare service staff will be explored during initial service contacts. beliefs which are incongruent with policy or practice implementation will be targeted during future intervention contacts. a focus of training workshops will be to provide knowledge for childcare service staff to motivate and equip staff with knowledge to facilitate implementation process: the active change process aimed to achieve individual staff and childcare service use of the intervention engaging: are appropriate individuals involved in the implementation through education, role modelling, training? service management committees, nominated supervisors and childcare service staff will be engaged in implementation through involvement in discussions regarding service priorities, service goals and strategies to meet goals and overcome barriers. services will be encouraged to explain and communicate any changes to service operation to families jones j, wolfenden l, wyse r, et al. bmj open 2014;4:e005312. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005312 7 open access group.bmj.com on august 14, 2015 - published by http://bmjopen.bmj.com/downloaded from 


measures childcare service operational characteristics operational information will include the number of years in operation, the number of enrolled and attending children aged 3–5 years, the type of service (preschool or long day care service), number of primary contact teach- ing staff and hours of operation. items to assess oper- ational characteristics will be similar to those used in other australian surveys of childcare services.22 25 35 service healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices the primary outcome is the change in prevalence of ser- vices meeting all healthy eating and physical activity pol- icies and practices. given there are no validated items to assess such policies and practices in australian childcare services, survey items assessing healthy eating and phys- ical activity policies and practices will be based on (where available) those previously used in the descrip- tion of the obesity prevention environments of australian childcare services,22 25 35 and validated items from the usa nutrition and physical activity self-assessment for child care instrument 62 63 and the child care nutrition and physical activity assessment survey.64 the validated items have adequate agreement (a) and κ scores (k). the items will assess: 1. presence of written nutrition (k = 0.76; a=88.1%) and physical activity policies (k=0.79; a=91%); 2. staff monitoring of children’s lunchboxes against written nutritional guidelines (a=88%) and provision of feedback to parents when a non-compliant food is packed (statistic unavailable); 3. provision of water (a=82%) or reduced fat milk only to children (k=0.73; a=82.1%); 4. staff role modelling of physically active play (k=0.59; a=69.1%) and healthy eating (a=90%); 5. staff provision of prompts and positive comments to children to encourage physical activity (statistic unavailable) and healthy eating (statistic unavailable); 6. provision of adult guided fundamental movement skill development activities (statistic unavailable); 7. restriction of sedentary screen time (a=97%). intervention acceptability at follow-up, the cati survey for intervention services will include items assessing the use, acceptability and sat- isfaction with the intervention resources, training and support provided to services. the items will require nominated supervisors and room leaders to respond to a series of statements on a four-point likert scale ranging from ‘strongly agree’ to ‘strongly disagree’. acceptability items will be developed by the research team based on previous assessments of staff acceptability in delivering health promotion programmes.25 context for descriptive purposes and to aid an assessment of the external validity of the trial ﬁndings, a systematic search will be conducted to describe the context in which the trial was conducted. speciﬁcally the search will include local news archives, websites of national and new south wales health and education departments, accreditation standards and professional healthy eating and physical activity guidelines to identify the existence of or changes in government policy, standards, funded programmes or guidelines that may inﬂuence the healthy eating and physical activity environments of childcare services. the search will include the 12 months prior to and 12 months during the intervention delivery. sample size and power calculations a 20% study attrition rate is estimated based on the pre- vious research in this setting.25 given this, recruitment of 128 services into the trial at baseline would be sufﬁ- cient to provide follow-up data from approximately 102 childcare services (51 per group) and enable the detec- tion of an absolute difference between groups in the prevalence of services meeting all policies and practices of 27% with 80% power and an α value of 0.05 (as out- lined in ﬁgure 1). the sample size calculation is based on an expected prevalence of control group services meeting all policies and practices at follow-up of 25% (unpublished data). statistical analysis descriptive statistics will be calculated to describe the demographic and service characteristics of intervention and control groups at baseline. all statistical tests will be 2-tailed with an α value of 0.05. the primary trial outcome will be analysed under an intention-to-treat framework where services are analysed based on the groups to which they were allocated, regardless of the treatment type or exposure received.65 intervention effectiveness will be determined using a logistic regres- sion model adjusted for baseline values. consistent with the approach of white et al,66 the primary analysis will use all available data and include baseline policy and practice implementation as a covariate. a sensitivity ana- lysis will be performed by imputing baseline observa- tions at follow-up for missing data. subgroup analyses will also be conducted by comparing service type (pre- school or long day care service), socioeconomic characteristics (service postcode in the top or bottom 50% of new south wales according to the socioeconomic indices for areas) and geographic characteristics (service locality, classiﬁed as urban or rural areas according to the australian statistical geography standard). discussion there is a clear need for intervention studies to extend the research regarding the implementation of 8 jones j, wolfenden l, wyse r, et al. bmj open 2014;4:e005312. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005312 open access group.bmj.com on august 14, 2015 - published by http://bmjopen.bmj.com/downloaded from 


healthy eating and physical activity policies and prac- tices by childcare services. this trial aims to advance the currently limited evidence in this ﬁeld and will contribute important information regarding the effect- iveness of intervention strategies to facilitate the population-wide implementation of healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices in childcare services. strengths of this study include the trial’s randomised design, the use of theoretical framework and broad set of intervention strategies, the long duration of the inter- vention (12 months), the implementation of procedures to reduce potential threats to internal validity, such as the blinding of data collection interviewers and computer-based randomisation of groups. conclusion this manuscript provides a description of the study methods to be employed as part of a randomised con- trolled trial of a multicomponent intervention to facili- tate the implementation of healthy eating and physical activity policies and practices in childcare services. the study is one of only a handful of randomised trials of such interventions internationally, and the ﬁrst of its kind in australia, and will contribute greatly to the evi- dence regarding the effectiveness of interventions in this setting. author affiliations 1hunter new england population health, wallsend, new south wales, australia 2school of medicine and public health, university of newcastle, callaghan, new south wales, australia 3hunter medical research institute, newcastle, new south wales, australia 4priority research centre for health behaviour, the university of newcastle, callaghan, new south wales, australia acknowledgements the authors wish to thank members of the good for kids. good for life early childhood education and care advisory group. contributors jj led the development of the manuscript. lw conceived the intervention concept. all the authors contributed to the research design and trial methodology and read and approved the final version of the manuscript. funding this study is funded by the australian national preventive health agency (reference: 95wol2011) with in-kind support for the trial provided by hunter new england population health. the project also received infrastructure support from the hunter medical research institute (hmri). competing interests lw secured grant funding from the australian national preventive health agency. ethics approval ethical approval to conduct the study has been obtained from the hunter new england human research ethics committee (reference: 12/08/15/5.01) and the university of newcastle human research ethics committee (reference: h-2012-0321). provenance and peer review not commissioned; externally peer reviewed. open access this is an open access article distributed in accordance with the creative commons attribution non commercial (cc by-nc 3.0) license, which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non- commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. see: http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/ references 1. de onis m, blossner m, borghi e. global prevalence and trends of overweight and obesity among preschool children. am j clin nutr 2010;92:1257–64. 2. venn aj, thomson rj, schmidt md, et al. overweight and obesity from childhood to adulthood: a follow-up of participants in the 1985 australian schools health and fitness survey. med j aust 2007;186:458–60. 3. hesketh kd, campbell kj. interventions to prevent obesity in 0– 5-year-olds: an updated systematic review of the literature. obesity 2010;18(suppl 1):p27–35. 4. goldfield gs, harvey a, grattan k, et al. physical activity promotion in the preschool years: a critical period to intervene. int j environ res public health 2012;9:1326–42. 5. birch ll, ventura ak. preventing childhood obesity: what works? int j obes (lond) 2009;33(suppl 1):p74–81. 6. swinburn b, gill t, kumanyika s. obesity prevention: a proposed framework for translating evidence into action. obes rev 2005;6:23–33. 7. dietz wh. critical periods in childhood for the development of obesity. am j clin nutr 1994;59:955–9. 8. story m, kaphingst km, french s. the role of child care settings in obesity prevention. future child 2006;16:43–168. 9. mamedova s, redford j. early childhood program participation, from the national household education surveys program of 2012. washington, dc: u.s. department of education, 2013. 10. huskinson t, pye j, medien k, et al. childcare and early years survey of parents 2011. uk department for education, 2013. 11. australian bureau of statistics. experimental estimates of preschool education (no. 4240.0). canberra: australian bureau of statistics, 2011. 12. trost sg, fees b, dzewaltowski d. feasibility and efficacy of a “move and learn” physical activity curriculum in preschool children. j phys act health 2008;5:88–103. 13. hardy l, king l, kelly b, et al. munch and move: evaluation of a preschool healthy eating and movement skill program. int j behav nutr phys act 2010;7:80. 14. de silva-sanigorski am, bell ac, kremer p, et al. reducing obesity in early childhood: results from romp & chomp, an australian community-wide intervention program. am j clin nutr 2010;91:831–40. 15. adams j, zask a, dietrich u. tooty fruity vegie in preschools: an obesity prevention intervention in preschools targeting children’s movement skills and eating behaviours. health promot j austr 2009;20:112–19. 16. institute of medicine. accelerating progress in obesity prevention: solving the weight of the nation. washington, dc: the national academies press, 2012. 17. larson n, ward ds, neelon sb, et al. what role can child-care settings play in obesity prevention? a review of the evidence and call for research efforts. j am diet assoc 2011;111:1343–62. 18. mcwilliams c, ball sc, benjamin se, et al. best-practice guidelines for physical activity at child care. pediatr 2009;124:1650–9. 19. mcpherson me, homer cj. policies to support obesity prevention for children: a focus on of early childhood policies. pediatr clin north am 2011;58:1521–41. 20. commonwealth of australia. get up and grow healthy eating and physical activity for early childhood. 2013. http://www.health.gov.au/ internet/main/publishing.nsf/content/phd-gug-staffcarers (accessed mar 2014). 21. australian children’s education and care quality authority. national quality framework. 2012. http://acecqa.gov.au/national-quality- framework (accessed mar 2014). 22. wolfenden l, neve m, farrel l, et al. physical activity policies and practices of childcare centres in australia. j paediatr child health 2010;47:73–6. 23. kelly b, hardy ll, howlett s, et al. opening up australian preschoolers’ lunchboxes. aus n z j public health 2010;34:288–92. 24. rabin ba, glasgow re, kerner jf, et al. dissemination and implementation research on community-based cancer prevention: a systematic review. am j prev med 2010;38:443–56. 25. finch m, wolfenden l, falkiner m, et al. impact of a population based intervention to increase the adoption of multiple physical activity practices in centre based childcare services: a quasi experimental, effectiveness study. int j behav nutr phys act 2012;9:101. 26. ward d, benjamin se, ammerman as, et al. nutrition and physical activity in child care: results from an environmental intervention. am j prev med 2008;35:352–6. 27. pettman t, mcallister m, verity f, et al. eat well be active community programs: final report. 2010. http://www.health.sa.gov.au/pehs (accessed mar 2014). jones j, wolfenden l, wyse r, et al. bmj open 2014;4:e005312. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005312 9 open access group.bmj.com on august 14, 2015 - published by http://bmjopen.bmj.com/downloaded from 


28. williams c, bollella mc, strobino ba, et al. “healthy start”: outcome of an intervention to promote a heart healthy diet in preschool children. j am coll nutr 2002;21:62–71. 29. moher d, schulz kf, altman dg. consort 2010 statement: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group randomised trials. plos med 2010;7:3. 30. australian bureau of statistics. australian statistical geography standard. canberra: australian bureau of statistics, 2011. http:// www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/d3310114.nsf/home/australian +statistical+geography+standard+(asgs) (accessed mar 2014). 31. australian bureau of statistics. 2011 census community profiles newcastle and lake macquarie. canberra: australian bureau of statistics, 2011. http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/ getproduct/census/2011/communityprofile/111? opendocument&navpos=100 (accessed mar 2014). 32. australian bureau of statistics. 2011 census community profiles hunter valley exc newcastle. canberra: australian bureau of statistics, 2011. http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/ getproduct/census/2011/communityprofile/106? opendocument&navpos=100 (accessed mar 2014). 33. australian bureau of statistics. childhood education and care june 2008 (reissue) (no.4402.0). canberra: australian bureau of statistics, 2009. 34. wolfenden l, kypri k, freund m, et al. obtaining active parental consent for school-based research: a guide for researchers. aust n z j public health 2009;33:270–5. 35. bell ca, davies l, finch m, et al. an implementation intervention to encourage healthy eating in centre-based childcare services: impact of the good for kids good for life program. public health nutr 2014:1–10. 36. wyse r, wolfenden l, campbell e, et al. a cluster randomised trial of a telephone based intervention for parents to increase fruit and vegetable consumption in their 3- to 5-year-old children: study protocol. bmc public health 2010;10:216. 37. finch m, wolfenden l, morgan pj, et al. a cluster randomised trial to evaluate a physical activity intervention among 3–5-year-old children attending long day care services: study protocol. bmc public health 2010;10:534. 38. ribisl km, walton ma, mowbray ct, et al. minimizing participant attrition in panel studies through the use of effective retention and tracking strategies: review and recommendations. eval program plann 1996;19:1–25. 39. australian government department of health and ageing. australian guide to healthy eating. canberra: australian government department of health and ageing, 2013. 40. australian government department of health and ageing. national physical activity recommendations for children 0–5 years olds. canberra: australian government department of health and ageing, 2010. 41. pagnini d, wilkenfeld r, king l, et al. the weight of opinion: the early childhood sectors perceptions about childhood overweight and obesity. sydney: centre for overweight and obesity, 2006. 42. grimshaw jm, eccles mp, lavis jn, et al. knowledge translation of research findings. implement sci 2012;7:50. 43. grimshaw jm, thomas re, maclennan g, et al. effectiveness and efficiency of guideline dissemination and implementation strategies. health technol assess 2004;8:iii––iv, 1–72. 44. grimshaw jm, shirran l, thomas r, et al. changing provider behavior: an overview of systematic reviews of interventions. med care 2001;39:112–45. 45. bero la, grilli r, grimshaw jm, et al. closing the gap between research and practice: an overview of systematic reviews of interventions to promote the implementation of research findings. bmj 1998;317:465–8. 46. yamey g. scaling up global health interventions: a proposed framework for success. plos med 2011;8:6. 47. rohrbach la, grana r, sussman s, et al. type ii translation: transporting prevention interventions from research to real-world settings. j educ eval health prof 2006;29:302–33. 48. soumerai sb, avorn j. principles of educational outreach (‘academic detailing’) to improve clinical decision making. j am med assoc 1990;263:549–56. 49. rohrbach la, graham jw, hansen wb. diffusion of a school-based substance abuse prevention program: predictors of program implementation. prev med 1993;22:237–60. 50. grol r, wensing m. what drives change? barriers to and incentives for achieving evidence-based practice. med j aust 2004;180: s57–60. 51. jurgis k, calkins e, feather j. enhancing physician adoption of practice guidelines: dissemination of influenza vaccination guideline using a small- group consensus process. arch intern med 1995;155:625–32. 52. oxman ad, thomson ma, davis da, et al. no magic bullets: a systematic review of 102 trials of interventions to improve professional practice. can med assoc j 1995;153:1423–31. 53. forsetlund l, bjørndal a, rashidian a, et al. continuing education meetings and workshops: effects on professional practice and health care outcomes. cochrane database syst rev 2009;(2):cd003030. 54. read c, kleiner b. which training methods are effective? manag dev rev 1996;9:24–9. 55. joyce b, showers b. improving inservice training: the messages of research. educ leadersh 1980;37:379–85. 56. o’brien m, rogers s, jamtvedt g, et al. educational outreach visits: effects on professional practice and health care outcomes. cochrane database syst rev 2007;(4):cd000409. 57. alvero a, bucklin br, austin a. an objective review of the effectiveness and essential characteristics of performance feedback in organizational settings (1985–1998). j organ behav manage 2001;21:1–28. 58. ivers n, jamtvedt g, flottorp s, et al. audit and feedback: effects on professional practice and healthcare outcomes. cochrane database syst rev 2012;6:cd000259. 59. noar sm, benac cn, harris ms. does tailoring matter? meta-analytic review of tailored print health behavior change interventions. psychol bull 2007;133:673–93. 60. damschroder lj, aron dc, keith re, et al. fostering implementation of health services research findings into practice: a consolidated framework for advancing implementation science. implement sci 2009;4:50. 61. sanders mr, cann w, markie-dadds c. the triple p-positive parenting programme: a universal population-level approach to the prevention of child abuse. child abuse rev 2003;12:155–71. 62. ammerman as, ward ds, benjamin se, et al. an intervention to promote healthy weight: nutrition and physical activity self-assessment for child care (nap sacc) theory and design. prev chronic dis 2007;4:a67. 63. benjamin se, neelon b, ball sc, et al. reliability and validity of a nutrition and physical activity environment self-assessment for childcare. int j behav nutr phys act 2007;4:1–10. 64. henderson ke, grode gm, middleton ae, et al. validity or a measure to assess the child-care nutrition and physical activity environment. j am diet assoc 2011;111:1306–13. 65. porta n, bone c, cobo e. discordance between reported intention-to-treat and per protocol analyses. j clin epidemiol 2007;60:663–9. 66. white ir, horton nj, carpenter j, et al. strategy for intention to treat analysis in randomised trials with missing outcome data. bmj 2011;342:910–12. 10 jones j, wolfenden l, wyse r, et al. bmj open 2014;4:e005312. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005312 open access group.bmj.com on august 14, 2015 - published by http://bmjopen.bmj.com/downloaded from 


policies and practices in childcare services of healthy eating and physical activity intervention to facilitate the implementation  a randomised controlled trial of an patrick mcelduff, paula wye and john wiggers yoong, pennie dodds, nicole pond, karen gillham, megan freund,  jannah jones, luke wolfenden, rebecca wyse, meghan finch, sze lin doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005312 2014 4: bmj open   http://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/4/4/e005312 updated information and services can be found at:  these include: references  #biblhttp://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/4/4/e005312 this article cites 49 articles, 6 of which you can access for free at:  open access http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/non-commercial. see:  provided the original work is properly cited and the use is non-commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms,  permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work commons attribution non commercial (cc by-nc 3.0) license, which  this is an open access article distributed in accordance with the creative service email alerting box at the top right corner of the online article.  receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article. sign up in the collections topic articles on similar topics can be found in the following collections   (1113)public health  (311)paediatrics notes http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions to request permissions go to: http://journals.bmj.com/cgi/reprintform to order reprints go to: http://group.bmj.com/subscribe/ to subscribe to bmj go to: group.bmj.com on august 14, 2015 - published by http://bmjopen.bmj.com/downloaded from 
