

16 journal of management vol. 40 no. 1, january 2014 16 –47 doi: 10.1177/0149206313498902 © the author(s) 2013 reprints and permissions: sagepub.com/journalspermissions.nav  tournament theory: thirty years of contests  and competitions brian l. connelly auburn university laszlo tihanyi texas a&m university t. russell crook university of tennessee k. ashley gangloff auburn university tournament theory is useful for describing behavior when reward structures are based on rela- tive rank rather than absolute levels of output. accordingly, management scholars have used  tournament theory to describe a wide range of inter- and intraorganizational competitions, such  as promotion contests, innovation contests, and competition among franchisees. while the use  of tournament theory has gained considerable momentum in recent years, the ideas that under- lie the theory have become blurred and potentially useful insights remain trapped within disci- plines. we, therefore, provide a synthesis of the theory’s foundational concepts, review its use in  the management literature, identify advancements from related disciplines that may be imported  to management research, and delineate the steps likely to be critical to moving the theory for- ward. our hope is this review will make tournament theory more accessible and salient to  management researchers with a view toward developing more nuanced versions of the theory  and applying it in a wider range of contexts. keywords: compensation, bonuses, and benefits; franchising; promotion systems; innovation  management; industrial economics lazear and rosen’s tournament theory . . . passes the smell test: the more grotesque your boss’s pay  and the less he has to do to earn it, the bigger the motivation for you to work for a promotion. —harford (2006: 1) corresponding author: brian l. connelly, auburn university, 415 w. magnolia ave., auburn, al 36849, usa.  e-mail: bconnelly@auburn.edu 498902 jomxxx10.1177/0149206313498902journal of managementconnelly et al. / tournament theory research-articlexxxx  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  17 the ratio of ceo-to-worker pay in large public companies has risen steadily from 40:1 in  1982 to 354:1 in 2012 (afl-cio, 2013). why is this gap so large? tournament theory  attempts to answer this question and, more generally, offer a means of describing the design  and governance of rank-order competitions (eriksson, 1999; henderson & fredrickson,  2001; lazear & rosen, 1981). there are, however, several factors that precipitate a review of  tournament theory. first, conceptual and methodological developments have occurred within  silos so that potentially useful insights remain trapped within specific applications of the  theory, resulting in a theoretical domain that is only loosely connected between disciplines  (nippa, 2010). a review can help bring together these discipline-specific advances under a  single umbrella. second, management scholars employing the theory almost universally  derive their conceptual arguments from lazear and rosen (1981), who were specifically  focused on optimum labor contracts. a review could help describe the theory in generalized  forms, consolidate progress made since the theory’s inception, and provide an underpinning  for future theorizing. third, few have explored the boundary conditions of tournament theory  or identified gaps in the literature as a whole. a review affords the opportunity, therefore, of  identifying what tournament theory adds beyond existing managerial theories and why it  should have an expanded role in management research. as the opening quotation suggests, the application of tournament theory originates in and  revolves around how to explain large differentials in prize structures, such as disproportion- ately high chief executive officer (ceo) salaries. given a number of simplifying assumptions,  tournament theorists show that relative rank-order prizes are superior to pay-for-performance  compensation mechanisms because they motivate a broader base of employees who strive for  promotion, rather than focusing on a single individual. as with gladiators of the past or  today’s professional tennis players, tournament theory suggests that participants are best  motivated to perform when prizes (i.e., surviving for the gladiator, advancing for the tennis  player, or being promoted for the office employee) are not contingent on absolute output but  instead are a function of winners and losers. as a result, small differences in performance can  result in large differences in payouts. one of the attractions of the theory in this most basic  form has been its formal rigidity and inherent testability (becker & huselid, 1992; eriksson,  1999; rosen, 1986). tournament theory arose out of the labor economics literature more than 30 years ago  (lazear & rosen, 1981). since then, it has expanded to a wide range of other disciplines,  such as law (anabtawi, 2005), ecology (zabel & roe, 2009), psychology (nieken & sliwka,  2010), and finance (kale, reis, & venkateswaran, 2009). for instance, scholars have exam- ined how nascar drivers balance risk taking and crowding as they square off to determine  a winner (bothner, kang, & stuart, 2007), how judges sit on increasingly prestigious courts  (e.g., circuit, district, superior) with the ultimate prize being the u.s. supreme court (choi  & gulati, 2004), and how contract growers vie to supply broiler chickens to perdue and  tyson (knoeber & thurman, 1994). these examples illustrate tournaments where reward  structures are based on relative rank (i.e., performance) rather than absolute levels of output  (lazear & rosen, 1981). tournament theory has also gained considerable momentum in the management literature.  it has frequently been employed to help explain compensation structures (e.g., messersmith,  guthrie, ji, & lee, 2011). however, tournament theory has also informed management  research exploring other rank-order contests (bothner et al., 2007; boudreau, lacetera, &   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


18  journal of management / january 2014 lakhani, 2011; gillis, mcewan, crook, & michael, 2011; morgan & wang, 2010).  management scholars have repeatedly found that tournaments are an integral, and sometimes  invisible, part of the organizational landscape (cappelli & cascio, 1991; devaro, 2006). in this review we describe tournament theory’s main concepts, define its key constructs,  and delineate its predictive relationships. we review research in management journals over  the past 30 years that have either used tournament theory or conducted experiments to  advance our understanding of the principles of tournament theory. we also review tourna- ment theory research in several other disciplines with a view toward identifying key advances  in the theory that could potentially inform management research. last, we explore some of  the limitations and boundary conditions of extant research on tournament theory and lay the  groundwork for future research. we hope this review spurs management researchers to con- sider how tournament theory might be useful to help explain a broad range of organizational  phenomena. fundamentals of tournament theory although there were some predecessors (e.g., rosenbaum, 1979), lazear and rosen  (1981) may be credited with the original formulation of tournament theory, and rosen (1986)  with subsequent extensions. the basic idea of a tournament for these authors was that firms  induce effort from employees by effectively pooling some portion of wages from all the  employees at one rank into the wages at the next highest rank, giving each the opportunity to  win promotion to that rank. key early studies developing the theory include an examination  of contest factors by nalebuff and stiglitz (1983), consideration of consecutive elimination  tournaments by rosen (1986), and empirical examination of the relationship between prize  levels and performance by ehrenberg and bognanno (1990). lambert, larcker, and weigelt  (1993) also contributed to this stream of literature by using different theoretical perspectives,  finding direct support for several theoretical assumptions of tournament theory. knoeber and  thurman (1994) compared the performance predictions by tournaments and linear perfor- mance evaluation structures of chicken growers, finding that growers’ behavior was unaf- fected by changes in the absolute level of prizes and thus confirming an important assumption  of mixed tournaments. scholars subsequently generalized the principles of tournament the- ory, applying them to athletes (frick, 2003), professors (gomez-mejia, trevino, & mixon,  2009), lawyers (price, 2003), and drug dealers (levitt & dubner, 2009), among others. key constructs tournaments are conceptualized as contests in which actors compete for a prize that is  awarded based on relative rank and is designed to incent an optimal level of effort (becker &  huselid, 1992; lazear, 1999). the prize is “optimal” when it maximizes the productive out- put of the tournament, including all participants (knoeber, 1989; knoeber & thurman, 1994;  lazear & rosen, 1981). if the prize spread (e.g., the difference between post- and prepromo- tion wages) is too small, contestants are not incented to compete so that the total productive  output of the tournament drops. a prize spread that is too high can also be detrimental because  it induces so much effort that contestants must be broadly compensated, again reducing tour- nament efficiency. tournament design, therefore, involves strategically choosing optimal  prize spreads that maximize productive output of the tournament.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  19 a key idea underlying tournament theory is that there are clear winners and losers. the  win percentage is the likelihood that any given contestant will win the prize. it is a function  of both the actor’s own willingness and ability to compete and the tournament size, which is  determined by its breadth (i.e., the number of unique competitors) and its depth (i.e., the  number of possible levels). the arguments that underlie winning and losing presuppose the  existence of rational economic actors who seek to maximize their individual utility, with  the prize as a predominant motive. in addition to effort, each actor’s likelihood of winning is  also a function of irreducible random components, such as weather in sports tournaments,  biases in legal tournaments, and serendipitous discoveries in innovation contests. foundational principles the primary mechanisms underlying tournament theory are best illustrated by examining  a tournament in its simplest form: a two-player contest with identical risk-neutral actors  (knoeber & thurman, 1994; lazear & rosen, 1981). in this model, let q measure the lifetime  output or performance of the two contestants. their output is a function of their level of effort  or investment (μ) and a random component (ε) that could be something like luck or noise. for  contestant j, his or her output formally is, qj = μj + εj. the two players both put forth effort to win the tournament, and their actions are costly. we  represent the cost of putting forth effort μ by c(μ). the rules of two-player tournaments fre- quently specify that contestants can receive one of two fixed prizes. the winner of the tour- nament receives w1 and the loser receives w2, where w1 > w2. the prize w1 is given to the  contestant with the higher performance. the loser, who receives w2, has the lower  performance. let us consider the probability of winning the higher prize (w1) by contestant i. if p  denotes the probability of winning w1 and both contestants’ investment costs are the same  c(μ), then the contestants can receive the following payoff: p[w1 – c(μ)] + (1 – p)[w2 – c(μ)] = p(w1 – w2) + w2 – c(μ). considering a tournament with contestants j and k, the probability that j wins the tournament is, p = prob[qj > qk] = prob[μj – μk < εk – εj] when each contestant uses investment (μi) to maximize his or her payoff, we can conclude  that, ∂ ∂ − − p w w c i iµ µ( ) ( )1 2 = 0 and ∂ ∂ −( ) − < = 2 2 1 2 0 p w w c i j k i i µ µ"( ) , , . '  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


20  journal of management / january 2014 the first equation includes the first derivative of p with respect to μ (e.g., the probability of  winning changes with the change in investment), and the 0 value of this equation indicates a  potential maximum or minimum point. the second derivative of p with respect to μ in the  second equation is negative, which suggests that the first derivative is decreasing with the  increase of μ (i.e., concave down). the two equations together, therefore, indicate a maxi- mum point, which can be illustrated with an inverted u-shaped graph. in a two-player tourna- ment, the nash solution takes place when both contestants maximize their payoffs while the  opponent’s investment is fixed. in this equilibrium state, the marginal cost of investment (c’)  equals v, or its marginal value, and the difference between the prizes indicates the optimum  solution, ∂ ∂ −( ) =p w w v iµ 1 2 . these equations highlight the two most foundational predictions of tournament theory.  specifically, they suggest that the contestants’ investments (and their outputs) are based on  how the change in their investment influences the probability of winning the contest. their  investments are also the negative function of their marginal costs, c(μi). thus, the first test- able prediction is that the actor’s level of effort increases with the spread between the win- ning and losing prize. the second is that only the difference between prizes w1 and w2  matters to these two contestants, rather than the absolute sizes of their winnings (knoeber &  thurman, 1994). these two main testable implications of tournament theory have enjoyed appreciable  empirical support through the years, principally from research in labor economics and sport  (bull, schotter, & weigelt, 1987; ehrenberg & bognanno, 1990; gibbs, 1994). many early  studies laid the empirical groundwork and initially established the theory’s validity (e.g.,  baker, jensen, & murphy, 1988; mclaughlin, 1988; nalebuff & stiglitz, 1983; o’keeffe,  viscusi, & zeckhauser, 1984). subsequent studies, however, also outlined its limitations in  explaining some aspects of human behavior and examined several relevant boundary condi- tions (e.g., henderson & fredrickson, 2001; lambert et al., 1993; main, o’reilly, & wade,  1993). extensions of the two-player model tournament theory researchers have extended the two-player model in different direc- tions, and we outline five important ways in which the theory has developed beyond this  basic formulation. first, a critical extension of the theory that received early attention  involves incorporating multiple players. mclaughlin (1988) derives expressions for the opti- mum prize differential and contestant effort in tournaments with n players. with more con- testants, the probability of winning is reduced. it is less obvious that the optimum prize  differential increases with tournament size while level of effort remains unaffected. when a  contestant in a tournament with multiple players marginally increases his or her effort, it  increases the probability of winning, but less so as n increases. therefore, the prize differen- tial must increase with n. second, tournament theorists have begun to incorporate aspects of actor heterogeneity  (nippa, 2010). knoeber and thurman (1994) describe how it is important in the above   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  21 formulas that contestants do not differ with respect to their abilities. if contestants are aware  of their own abilities and those of others, then it is no longer the case that the contestant who  puts forth the most effort wins. this results in lower levels of effort because less able actors  know they are less likely to win the tournament, which confounds the equations above.  tournament designers may account for contestant heterogeneity by forming subcontests,  wherein contestants compete with a more homogeneous subgroup (gomez-mejia et al.,  2009) or by handicapping, which increases the win percentage for disadvantaged actors  (pfeifer, 2011). third, some expressions of tournament theory challenge the simplifying assumption that  contestants operate independently (main et al., 1993). in an interdependent environment,  compensation based on individual performance may not make sense because it fosters  undue competition among contestants. this changes the optimization formulas because the  value proposition becomes not only a function of the cost of effort, but also sabotage. that  is, contestants may benefit not only from increasing their own productivity but also from  reducing others’, but there is a cost associated with both types of effort. lazear (1998)  describes how prize differentials, therefore, must be reduced when players exhibit uncoop- erative behavior. fourth, some studies have drawn attention to the importance of the tournament’s environ- ment. as shown in the formulas above, the optimum level of effort for a given prize differen- tial increases with the random component ε. in environments where luck or exogenous  shocks play an important role, firms should use a larger prize differential to offset the effort- reducing effects of randomness. lazear (1998) points out that this may be particularly impor- tant in comparisons of compensation policies across industry or national contexts. last, scholars have extended this model to examine how value functions change in  sequential tournaments (rosen, 1986). the ratio of prizes in sequential tournaments increases  by level because the value functions include not only the higher prize at that level, but also  the value of the possibility to compete for larger prizes at higher levels. as a result, there is a  convex relationship between prize differential and tournament level for risk-averse contes- tants. the flip side of that coin, however, is that there is no further prize to be won at the  highest level. for this reason, tournament theory predicts an extraordinarily large prize dif- ferential at the highest level of a sequential tournament, such as for ceo pay in an internal  promotion contest. in table 1 we summarize some of the definitions described above. tournament theory in management research to assess how management researchers have applied tournament theory, we searched the  major academic journals using the keywords tournament and tournament theory for the years  1981 through 2012. we selected the following 20 journals (in order of those that ultimately  yielded the most tournament theory citations): academy of management journal (66),  management science (45), strategic management journal (34), journal of management  (33), organization science (30), journal of management studies (27), academy of  management review (26), administrative science quarterly (25), journal of organizational  behavior (19), human relations (18), journal of applied psychology (18), organizational  behavior and human decision processes (18), human resource management (16), journal  of labor research (11), group & organization management (9), organization studies (9),   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


22  journal of management / january 2014 table 1 primary constructs construct description pertinent citations tournament   a contest wherein actors compete for a prize that is  awarded based on relative rank. lazear & rosen, 1981 rosen, 1986 prize reward for tournament winner(s) designed to incent  the effort of all contestants. this may be monetary  or have monetary value attached to it, but it could  also be about prestige, privilege, or the possibility  of competing in successive tournaments. knoeber & thurman,  1994 moldovanu, sela, &  shi, 2007   prize spread (for  “prize,” some also use  compensation, wage, pay,  or inter-rank; for “spread,”  some also use dispersion,  disparity, inequality, or  gap)  in sequential tournaments, the difference between the  prize for winning the current tournament and that  for winning the next highest level. in promotion  contests this reduces to the wage spread between  workers at their current level and what they would  be earning at the next level. becker & huselid, 1992 messersmith, guthrie,  ji, & lee, 2011 prize optimization   the prize spread that maximizes the ratio of actor  effort to prize. if too small, actors are not incented  to exert effort. if too high, actors take on additional  risk of losing the contest and need to be separately  compensated for that risk. devaro, 2006 kepes, delery, &  gupta, 2009 tournament size the combination of a tournament’s breadth (i.e.,  number of unique competitors) and depth (i.e.,  number of possible levels). che & gale, 2003 boudreau, lacetera, &  lakhani, 2011   win percentage   the likelihood that any given actor will win a prize.  this is an important predictor of motivation. chen, ham, & lim,  2011 taylor & trogdon, 2002 actor heterogeneity differences among actors that could influence  tournament variables and their final relative rank. bothner, kang, &  stuart, 2007  shaw & gupta, 2007 handicapping adjusting incentives or processes to account for  heterogeneity, increasing (decreasing) the win  percentage for disadvantaged (advantaged) actors. pfeifer, 2011 frick, 2003  tracking creating subcontests (i.e., tracks within contests) to  account for heterogeneity so actors may compete  with a more homogeneous subgroup. gomez-mejia, trevino,  & mixon, 2009 nippa, 2010   sequential elimination  (hierarchical tournaments)  actors that win a tournament then compete in another  tournament against other winning actors. choi & gulati, 2004 o’neill & o’reilly,  2010 personnel psychology (8), journal of international business studies (6), journal of business  venturing (5), and entrepreneurship theory & practice (5). we also examined the reference  sections of identified articles to find other potentially important articles. last, we conducted  an ancestry search of management articles referencing either of two seminal articles: lazear  and rosen (1981) and becker and huselid (1992). in figure 1, we depict the citation count  growth of lazear and rosen (1981) and the growth trajectory of tournament research in  management.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  23 different types of tournaments generally involve their own unique sets of research ques- tions, methods, and relationships examined. therefore, we organize our review of the man- agement literature around five substantive domains that use tournament theory. we did not  include articles that examine concepts central to tournament theory, such as competition or  pay inequality, without specifically invoking a tournament model. in table 2 we summarize  the contributions of key management articles for each domain (this table includes a few  articles not from our initially targeted management journals and one academically minded  book that arose from our reference and ancestry searches). pay dispersion every year news organizations devote attention to the apparently exorbitant salaries that  go to the highest paid ceos, with special attention devoted to those who appear to enrich  themselves at the expense of other employees in the organization (connelly, haynes, tihanyi,  & devers, 2011). management scholars have heeded these public calls for attention by  exploring the antecedents and consequences of pay dispersion (gupta, conroy, & delery,  2012), which refers to the amount of difference in pay between levels of an organization  (scholars interchangeably combine any of the terms pay/earnings/wage with any of the terms  disparity/dispersion/discrepancy/gap/differential/inequality/variation). such studies have  examined the gap in pay between the ceo and other members of the top management team  (tmt; carpenter & sanders, 2002), between executives and other employees (wade,  figure 1 growth of tournament theory in the literature.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


24 t ab le  2 k ey  m an ag em en t a rt ic le s  u ti li zi n g  t ou rn am en t  t h eo ry a rt ic le d ep en de nt  v ar ia bl e( s) u ni t o f  a na ly si s s tu dy  d es ig n k ey  t ou rn am en t t he or y  c on ce pt s  a dd re ss ed p ay  d is pe rs io n   m es se rs m it h,  g ut hr ie , j i,  &   l ee , j ou rn al  o f a pp li ed   p sy ch ol og y  (2 01 1)   t ur no ve r m an ag er ; t m t h l m a rc hi va l d at a •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  is  a ss oc ia te d  w it h  in cr ea se d  li ke li ho od  o f  tu rn ov er •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  ef fe ct s  ar e  co nt in ge nt  o n  m ar ke t p ay  le ve l,  in ce nt iv e  in te ns it y,  a nd  a n  ac to r’ s  “s ha re ”  of  th e  to ta l c om pe ns at io n     f re dr ic ks on , d av is -b la ke ,  &  s an de rs , s tr at eg ic   m an ag em en t j ou rn al   (2 01 0) p ay  d is pe rs io n;  f ir m   pe rf or m an ce t m t c ro ss -s ec ti on al  ti m e  se ri es   re gr es si on a rc hi va l d at a •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  re fl ec ts  a ct or  h et er og en ei ty •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  m ay  le ad  to  u nd es ir ab le  le ve ls  o f  co nf li ct  b et w ee n  ac to rs   if  th ey  h av e  re as on  to  b el ie ve  th ey  s ho ul d  re ce iv e  si m il ar  p ri ze s •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  is  n eg at iv el y  re la te d  to  o rg an iz at io na l p er fo rm an ce ,  pa rt ic ul ar ly  w he n  it  is  m or e  th an  c an  b e  ju st if ie d •• t ou rn am en t a nd  p ri ze  s tr uc tu re  d es ig ne rs  a re  in fl ue nc ed  b y  so ci al - ps yc ho lo gi ca l f ac to rs  th at  a ff ec t c om pa ri so ns  a m on g  ac to rs   k ep es , d el er y,  &  g up ta ,  p er so nn el  p sy ch ol og y   (2 00 9)   w or kf or ce  p ro du ct iv it y;   fi rm  p er fo rm an ce f ir m h ie ra rc hi ca l r eg re ss io n a rc hi va l a nd  s ur ve y  da ta •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  ef fe ct s  on  p ro du ct iv it y  ar e  co nt in ge nt  o n  w he th er  th e  pr iz e  is  p er fo rm an ce  b as ed  o r  po li ti ca ll y  ba se d •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  ef fe ct s  ar e  gr ea te r  on  p ro xi m al  o ut co m es  ( e. g. ,  pr od uc ti vi ty )  th an  d is ta l o ut co m es  ( e. g. , f ir m  p er fo rm an ce )    e ns le y,  p ea rs on , &   s ar de sh m uk h,  j ou rn al  o f  b us in es s  r es ea rc h  (2 00 7)   c oh es io n;  c on fl ic t;   po te nc y t m t t  t es ts ; s e m su rv ey  d at a •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  ef fe ct s  on  n eg at iv e  be ha vi or al  c on se qu en ce s  ar e  di ff er en t  de pe nd in g  on  f ir m  ty pe  ( e. g. , f am il y  vs . n on fa m il y  fi rm s)     s ha w  &  g up ta , p er so nn el   p sy ch ol og y  (2 00 7)   q ui ts f ir m h ie ra rc hi ca l r eg re ss io n su rv ey  d at a •   p ri ze  s pr ea d,  b as is  f or  th e  pr iz e,  a nd  c om m un ic at io n  ab ou t t he  p ri ze   ha ve  d if fe re nt ia l e ff ec ts  o n  th e  re te nt io n  of  h et er og en eo us  a ct or s  ba se d  on  q ua li ty     s ie ge l &  h am br ic k,   o rg an iz at io n  sc ie nc e   (2 00 5)   f ir m  p er fo rm an ce t m t c ro ss -s ec ti on al  m ul ti pl e  re gr es si on a rc hi va l d at a •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  is  m or e  de tr im en ta l t o  fi rm s  th at  r eq ui re  c ol la bo ra ti on •• t ou rn am en ts  m ay  f os te r  ag gr es si ve  a nd  c om pe ti ti ve  b eh av io r     c ar pe nt er  &  s an de rs ,  jo ur na l o f m an ag em en t  (2 00 4)   f ir m  p er fo rm an ce t m t t w o- st ag e  le as t s qu ar es   re gr es si on a rc hi va l d at a •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  be tw ee n  th e  to p  ac to r  an d  th e  ne xt  le ve l i s  ne ga ti ve ly   re la te d  to  p er fo rm an ce •• t ou rn am en t s tr uc tu re s  th at  f av or  c ol le ct iv e  ac ti on  a re  a pp li ca bl e  to   si tu at io ns  r eq ui ri ng  c oo rd in at io n  an d  co op er at io n     b lo om  &  m ic he l,  a ca de m y  of  m an ag em en t j ou rn al   (2 00 2)   p ay  s tr uc tu re ; t ur no ve r;   m an ag er ia l t en ur e f ir m h l m ; l og is ti c  re gr es si on a rc hi va l d at a •• r is k  an d  un ce rt ai nt y  m ay  r eq ui re  g re at er  p ri ze  s pr ea d  to  a tt ra ct , r et ai n,   an d  m ot iv at e  to p  ac to rs •• h ig he r  pr iz e  sp re ad  le ad s  to  lo w er  te nu re  a nd  g re at er  tu rn ov er   (c on ti nu ed )  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


25 a rt ic le d ep en de nt  v ar ia bl e( s) u ni t o f  a na ly si s s tu dy  d es ig n k ey  t ou rn am en t t he or y  c on ce pt s  a dd re ss ed   c on yo n,  p ec k,  &  s ad le r,   st ra te gi c  m an ag em en t  jo ur na l ( 20 01 )   c om pe ns at io n;  p ay   di sp er si on ; f ir m   pe rf or m an ce m an ag er ; t m t m ul ti va ri at e  re gr es si on a rc hi va l d at a •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  is  p os it iv el y  re la te d  to  to ur na m en t s iz e •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  w it hi n  a  te am  is  m ar gi na ll y  re la te d  to  o rg an iz at io na l  pe rf or m an ce •• t he  r el at io ns hi p  be tw ee n  pr iz e  an d  hi er ar ch ic al  le ve l i s  co nv ex     h en de rs on  &  f re dr ic ks on ,  a ca de m y  of  m an ag em en t  jo ur na l ( 20 01 )  c e o -t m t  p ay   di sp er si on ; f ir m   pe rf or m an ce f ir m ; t m t m ul ti pl e  re gr es si on a rc hi va l d at a •• t he  n ee d  fo r  co or di na ti on  in fl ue nc es  p ri ze  s pr ea d •• t ou rn am en ts  w it h  la rg e  pr iz e  sp re ad s  ca n  m ot iv at e  m or e  ef fo rt  b ut   al so  m ay  u nw it ti ng ly  p ro m ot e  co un te rp ro du ct iv e  be ha vi or •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  in cr ea se s  w it h  to ur na m en t s iz e    b lo om , a ca de m y  of   m an ag em en t j ou rn al   (1 99 9)   p la ye r  pe rf or m an ce ; t ea m   pe rf or m an ce p la ye r;  te am h l m ; a ut or eg re ss iv e  m od el in g a rc hi va l d at a •• g re at er  p ri ze  s pr ea d  is  a ss oc ia te d  w it h  lo w er  in di vi du al  a nd  g ro up   pe rf or m an ce  w he re  in te rd ep en de nc ie s  ar e  im po rt an t •• r an ke d  po si ti on  m od er at es  th e  pr iz e  sp re ad –p er fo rm an ce  r el at io ns hi p    l am be rt , l ar ck er , &   w ei ge lt , a dm in is tr at iv e  sc ie nc e  q ua rt er ly  ( 19 93 )   c om pe ns at io n m an ag er c ro ss -s ec ti on al  m ul ti pl e  re gr es si on a rc hi va l a nd  s ur ve y  da ta •• t he  r el at io ns hi p  be tw ee n  pr iz e  an d  hi er ar ch ic al  le ve l i s  co nv ex •• t he  p ri ze  s pr ea d  be tw ee n  th e  to p  pr iz e  re la ti ve  to  th e  ne xt  lo w er  p ri ze   is  g re at er  th an  th at  b et w ee n  ot he r  le ve ls  in  th e  hi er ar ch y    p fe ff er  &  l an gt on ,  a dm in is tr at iv e  sc ie nc e  q ua rt er ly  ( 19 93 )   s at is fa ct io n;  p ro du ct iv it y;   co ll ab or at io n d ep ar tm en t;   pr of es so r m ul ti pl e  re gr es si on a rc hi va l a nd  s ur ve y  da ta •• t he  g re at er  th e  pr iz e  sp re ad , t he  lo w er  th e  ac to rs ’  sa ti sf ac ti on  a nd   pr od uc ti vi ty  a nd  th e  le ss  li ke ly  it  is  th at  a ct or s  w il l c ol la bo ra te  to   in cr ea se  p ro du ct iv it y    c ap pe ll i &  c as ci o,  a ca de m y  of  m an ag em en t j ou rn al   (1 99 1)   w ag e  pr em iu m jo bs o l s  r eg re ss io n a rc hi va l a nd  s ur ve y  da ta •• p os it io ns  a t t he  to p  of  th e  hi er ar ch y  co m m an d  pr iz e  pr em iu m s •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  m ot iv at es  a ct or s  th at  a re  c ur re nt ly  c om pe ti ng  in  th e  to ur na m en t a s  w el l a s  th os e  th at  a re  n ot  e ve n  pa rt ic ip at in g  in  th e  to ur na m en t y et     o ’r ei ll y,  m ai n,  &  c ry st al ,  a dm in is tr at iv e  sc ie nc e  q ua rt er ly  ( 19 88 )  c om pe ns at io n;  p ay   di sp ar it y in du st ry ; f ir m ;  t m t ; b o d   m em be r;   m an ag er m ul ti pl e  re gr es si on a rc hi va l d at a •• n o  su pp or t w as  f ou nd  f or  to ur na m en t t he or y  pr ed ic ti on s   a ct or  e ff or t i n  pr om ot io n  to ur na m en ts   p fe if er , j ou rn al  o f l ab or   r es ea rc h  (2 01 1)   e du ca ti on ; e xp er ie nc e;   w ag es ; p ro m ot io n e m pl oy ee p ro bi t r eg re ss io n;  c ox   pr op or ti on al  h az ar ds   re gr es si on ; o l s  r eg re ss io n a rc hi va l d at a •• h an di ca pp in g  in cr ea se s  th e  w in  p er ce nt ag e  fo r  di sa dv an ta ge d  ac to rs •• h an di ca ps  a re  g ra nt ed  b as ed  o n  va ri ou s  ac to r  ch ar ac te ri st ic s  in cl ud in g  ge nd er   (c on ti nu ed ) t ab le  2  ( co n ti n u ed )  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


26 a rt ic le d ep en de nt  v ar ia bl e( s) u ni t o f  a na ly si s s tu dy  d es ig n k ey  t ou rn am en t t he or y  c on ce pt s  a dd re ss ed   g om ez -m ej ia , t re vi no ,  &  m ix on , i nt er na ti on al   jo ur na l o f h um an   r es ou rc e  m an ag em en t  (2 00 9)   n am ed  p ro fe ss or sh ip s p ro fe ss or l og is ti c  re gr es si on a rc hi va l d at a •• t ra ck in g  ca n  ac co un t f or  a ct or  h et er og en ei ty •• a gr ee d- on  m et ri cs  f or  r an ki ng  in fl ue nc e  ac to r  pe rf or m an ce •• p er ce pt io ns  o f  to ur na m en t f ai rn es s  in fl ue nc e  ac to r  ef fo rt  a nd   co ll ab or at io n    o ’n ei ll  &  o ’r ei ll y,   jo ur na l o f o rg an iz at io na l  b eh av io r   (2 01 0)   in co m e  at ta in m en t;  h ou rs   w or ke d  pe r  w ee k m b a  g ra du at e h l m su rv ey  d at a •• a ct or  h et er og en ei ty  le ad s  to  s uc ce ss  o f  hi gh er  q ua li ty  a ct or s  in  e ar ly   ro un ds , b ut  o ve r  ti m e,  e ff or t i s  a  be tt er  d et er m in an t     d ev ar o,  s tr at eg ic   m an ag em en t j ou rn al   (2 00 6)   w or ke r  pe rf or m an ce e m pl oy ee ; f ir m p ro bi t r eg re ss io n su rv ey  d at a •• r el at iv e  pe rf or m an ce  d et er m in es  p ro m ot io n  of  s ki ll ed  a ct or s •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  is  a ss oc ia te d  w it h  hi gh er  le ve ls  o f  in di vi du al  p er fo rm an ce •• t ou rn am en t p ar ti ci pa nt s  an d  th os e  ru nn in g  th e  to ur na m en t o pe ra te   to ge th er  to  d et er m in e  to ur na m en t o ut co m es     o rr is on , s ch ot te r,  &   w ei ge lt , m an ag em en t  sc ie nc e  (2 00 4)   e ff or t- le ve l d ec is io ns t ou rn am en t w il co xo n  si gn ed -r an k  te st ;  m an n– w hi tn ey e xp er im en t •• b eh av io r  is  in va ri an t t o  to ur na m en t s iz e  w he n  th e  pr op or ti on  o f  hi gh   pr iz es  is  c on st an t •• h ig h  pe rc en ta ge  o f  la rg e  pr iz es  m ay  r es ul t i n  re du ce d  ef fo rt •• t ou rn am en t s iz e  ca n  re du ce  th e  in ef fi ci en cy  e ff ec ts  o f  di sc ri m in at io n    g re en w oo d  &  e m ps on ,  o rg an iz at io n  st ud ie s  (2 00 3) c on ce pt ua l f ir m r ev ie w  a nd  p ro po si ti on s •• in te ns e  lo ya lt y  an d  or ga ni za ti on al  c om m it m en t m ay  b e  at tr ib ut ed  to   to ur na m en t s ty le  ( up  o r  ou t)  o rg an iz at io na l s tr uc tu re s in no va ti on  c on te st s   a da m cz yk , b ul li ng er , &   m os le in , c re at iv it y  an d  in no va ti on  m an ag em en t  (2 01 2) c on ce pt ua l n/ a l it er at ur e  re vi ew •• t ou rn am en ts  f al l i nt o  tw o  br oa d  ca te go ri es : e co no m ic  a nd   m an ag em en t •• t ou rn am en ts  c an  te ac h  co m m un ic at io n,  te am w or k,  a nd  te ch ni ca l s ki ll s •• t ou rn am en ts  c an  b e  us ed  to  g en er at e  ne w  s ol ut io ns  to  o ld  p ro bl em s •• f iv e  el em en ts  e ss en ti al  to  to ur na m en t d es ig n  in cl ud e  th e  (a )  at tr ac ti on  o f  po te nt ia l c on te st an ts  to  th e  to ur na m en t,  (b )  fa ci li ta ti on  o f  pa rt ic ip an ts , ( c)  s po ns or sh ip  ( fi na nc ia l o r  ot he rw is e) , ( d)  n um be r  an d  st ru ct ur e  of  c on te st  p ha se s,  a nd  ( e)  r ep li ca ti on   l ak ha ni , l if sh it z- a ss af , &   t us hm an , w or ki ng  p ap er   (2 01 2) c on ce pt ua l f ir m r ev ie w  a nd  th eo re ti ca l  fr am ew or k •• t ou rn am en t o rg an iz er s  (a )  ge ne ra te  a  p oo l o f  co nt es ta nt s  an d  (b )  se le ct   th e  be st  o ne •• t ou rn am en ts  m ay  b e  m os t e ff ic ie nt  w he re  s ol ut io n  kn ow le dg e  is   w id el y  di st ri bu te d  bu t s el ec ti on  k no w le dg e  is  c on ce nt ra te d (c on ti nu ed ) t ab le  2  ( co n ti n u ed )  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


27 a rt ic le d ep en de nt  v ar ia bl e( s) u ni t o f  a na ly si s s tu dy  d es ig n k ey  t ou rn am en t t he or y  c on ce pt s  a dd re ss ed   b ou dr ea u,  l ac et er a,  &   l ak ha ni , m an ag em en t  sc ie nc e  (2 01 1)   p ro bl em -s ol vi ng   pe rf or m an ce p ro bl em ;  in no va ti on   co nt es t l in ea r  pa ne l- da ta  r eg re ss io n;   qu an ti le  r eg re ss io n q ua si -e xp er im en t •• in cr ea se s  in  to ur na m en t s iz e  in cr ea se s  th e  li ke li ho od  th at  a t l ea st  o ne   co nt es ta nt  w il l f in d  a  w in ni ng  s ol ut io n •• p ar al le l p at h  ef fe ct s  co ex is t w it h  in ce nt iv e  ef fe ct s •• h ig he r  le ve ls  o f  pr ob le m  u nc er ta in ty  in cr ea se  th e  pa ra lle l p at h  ef fe ct  o f  in cr ea se s  in  to ur na m en t s iz e  an d  re du ce s  th e  ne ga tiv e  in ce nt iv e  ef fe ct     m or ga n  &  w an g,  c al if or ni a  m an ag em en t r ev ie w   (2 01 0) c on ce pt ua l c on te st an t;   in no va ti on   co nt es t d es cr ip ti ve  a nd  p re sc ri pt iv e  ap pr oa ch  to  th e  us e  of   in no va ti on  to ur na m en ts •• t ou rn am en ts  c an  b e  us ed  to  g en er at e  “r ev ol ut io na ry ”  in no va ti on •• p ri ze s  ot he r  th an  f in an ci al  c om pe ns at io n  ca n  be  u se d  to  m ot iv at e  hi gh er  le ve ls  o f  ac to r  pe rf or m an ce •• in di vi si bl e  pr iz es  c an  r ed uc e  co op er at io n  am on g  ac to rs   b ou dr ea u  &  l ak ha ni ,  m it  s lo an  m an ag em en t  r ev ie w  ( 20 09 ) c on ce pt ua l f ir m d es cr ip ti ve  a nd  p re sc ri pt iv e  ap pr oa ch  to  th e  us e  of   in no va ti on  to ur na m en ts •• c om m un it ie s  an d  m ar ke ts  r es po nd  d if fe re nt ly  to  d if fe re nt  p ri ze s •• s om e  fi rm s  m ay  c ho os e  a  “n es te d”  to ur na m en t s tr uc tu re  in  w hi ch   ac to rs  a re  in  c om m un it ie s  an d  m ar ke ts  a s  to  r ea p  th e  be ne fi ts  o f  bo th   t er w ie sc h  &  u lr ic h,   a ca de m ic  t ex t ( 20 09 ) c on ce pt ua l c on te st an t;   in no va ti on   co nt es t r ev ie w  a nd  ty po lo gy  o f  in no va ti on  c on te st s •• t ou rn am en ts  a ll ow  m ul ti pl e  ro un ds  to  f il te r  co nt es ta nt s  th at  a re  w ea k •• t ou rn am en ts  o pe n  to  th e  pu bl ic  c an  g en er at e  a  w id er  v ar ie ty  o f  so lu ti on s •• t ou rn am en ts  c lo se d  to  th e  pu bl ic  a ll ow  f ir m s  to  m ai nt ai n  pr op ri et y •• t ou rn am en ts  c an  b e  it er at iv e  w he re  e li m in at ed  c on te st an ts  c an  r ee nt er   th e  co nt es t a t l at er  r ou nd s •• f or  b et te r  ou tp ut , t ou rn am en t o rg an iz er s  al te r  to ur na m en t s iz e  an d  ac to r  he te ro ge ne it y   t er w ie sc h  &  x u,   m an ag em en t s ci en ce   (2 00 8) p ro bl em -s ol vi ng   pe rf or m an ce in no va ti on   co nt es t;  f ir m d ed uc ti ve •• t he  ty pe  o f  pr ob le m  th at  n ee ds  s ol vi ng  s ho ul d  be  c on si de re d  in   to ur na m en t d es ig n •• a ct or  h et er og en ei ty  c an  m it ig at e  th e  ne ga ti ve  e ff ec t o f  un de ri nv es tm en t a ss oc ia te d  w it h  in cr ea se s  in  to ur na m en t s iz e   m ur ra y  &  o ’m ah on y,   o rg an iz at io n  sc ie nc e   (2 00 7) c on ce pt ua l c on te st an t;  f ir m ;  co m m un it y;   fi el d;   in st it ut io n r ev ie w  o f  m ul ti le ve l  in fl ue nc es  o n  in no va ti on   co nt es ts •• r ec ip ro ca l r ew ar ds  s uc h  as  r ep ut at io n  or  c re di t c an  in du ce  k no w le dg e  sh ar in g  an d  ot he r  be ne fi ts  to  to ur na m en t o rg an iz er s •• in st it ut io ns , f ie ld s,  c om m un it ie s,  a nd  o rg an iz at io ns  h av e  di ff er en t  ef fe ct s  on  a ct or  p ar ti ci pa ti on  a nd  b eh av io r •• p ri ze s  ca n  be  m an ag ed  v ia  le ga l o r  no rm at iv e  m ec ha ni sm s f ra nc hi si ng   c om bs , k et ch en , &  s ho rt ,  e nt re pr en eu rs hi p  t he or y  &  p ra ct ic e   (2 01 1) c on ce pt ua l n/ a in tr od uc ti on  to  a  s pe ci al   is su e •• t ou rn am en t t he or y  ca n  w or k  in  c on ju nc ti on  w it h  ot he r  th eo ri es  to   pr ov id e  a  m or e  co m pl et e  un de rs ta nd in g  of  o rg an iz at io na l p he no m en a •• t he  e ff ec ti ve ne ss  o f  to ur na m en ts  is  c on ti ng en t o n  a  ra ng e  of  b ou nd ar y  co nd it io ns (c on ti nu ed ) t ab le  2  ( co n ti n u ed )  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


28 a rt ic le d ep en de nt  v ar ia bl e( s) u ni t o f  a na ly si s s tu dy  d es ig n k ey  t ou rn am en t t he or y  c on ce pt s  a dd re ss ed   g il li s,  m ce w an , c ro ok , &   m ic ha el , e nt re pr en eu rs hi p  t he or y  &  p ra ct ic e  (2 01 1)   m ul ti un it  f ra nc hi si ng f ra nc hi so r o l s  r eg re ss io n su rv ey  d at a •• t ou rn am en ts  c an  e xi st  w it ho ut  b ei ng  p ub li cl y  ac kn ow le dg ed •• a ct or s  ex er t g re at er  e ff or t w he n  th ey  p er ce iv e  op po rt un it y  fo r  ga in   ev en  if  th ey  s ho ul d  lo se  th e  to ur na m en t •• t he  u se  o f  to ur na m en ts  is  c on ti ng en t o n  va ri ou s  fi rm  a nd  m ar ke t  fa ct or s     k id w el l &  n yg aa rd ,  e nt re pr en eu rs hi p  t he or y  &  p ra ct ic e  (2 01 1) c on ce pt ua l f ra nc hi so r r ev ie w  a nd  p ro po si ti on s •   r ep or ti ng  o f  re su lt s  le nd s  to  m ar ke t c on tr ol  a s  it  a ll ow s  fo r  so ci al   co m pa ri so n m an ag em en t e xp er im en ts  in  to ur na m en t t he or y   b oy le  &  s ha pi ra ,  o rg an iz at io n  sc ie nc e   (2 01 1)   #  of  p oi nt s  ri sk ed c on te st an t o l s  r eg re ss io n a rc hi va l d at a •• a ct or  a tt en ti on  o n  su rv iv al  a nd  a sp ir at io ns  d if fe r  ba se d  on  r el at iv e  ra nk •• l ea de rs  o r  hi gh  p er fo rm er s  ta ke  m or e  ri sk s  to  m ai nt ai n  re la ti ve  r an k     c he n,  h am , &  l im ,  m an ag em en t s ci en ce   (2 01 1)   e ff or t l ev el t ou rn am en t t t es t;  o l s  r eg re ss io n e xp er im en t •• f av or it es  a nd  u nd er do gs  e xh ib it  d if fe re nt ia l e ff ec ts •• e ve n  ad va nt ag ed  a ct or s  in cr ea se  e ff or t a s  pr iz e  sp re ad  in cr ea se s     b ot hn er , k an g,  &  s tu ar t,  a dm in is tr at iv e  sc ie nc e  q ua rt er ly  ( 20 07 )  r is k- ta ki ng  b eh av io r r ac e;  s ea so n l og is ti c  re gr es si on a rc hi va l d at a •• c ro w di ng  f ro m  b el ow  in cr ea se s  ri sk  ta ki ng  a nd  c om pe ti ti ve ne ss •• z er o- su m  to ur na m en ts  f or ce  a ct or s  to  r ea ct  to  o ne  a no th er ’s  a tt em pt s  to  a dv an ce     b ec ke r  &  h us el id ,  a dm in is tr at iv e  sc ie nc e  q ua rt er ly  ( 19 92 )  d ri ve r  pe rf or m an ce ;  dr iv er  s af et y r ac e f ix ed -e ff ec ts  m od el in g a rc hi va l d at a •• in ce nt iv e  ef fe ct s  di m in is h  as  p ri ze  s pr ea d  in cr ea se s •• t ou rn am en ts  m ay  m ot iv at e  un de si ra bl e  be ha vi or •• s om e  to ur na m en ts  r eq ui re  c oo pe ra ti on  to  a dv an ce     h ar de r,  a dm in is tr at iv e  sc ie nc e  q ua rt er ly  ( 19 92 ) p la ye r  pe rf or m an ce ;  se lf is h/ co op er at iv e  be ha vi or p la ye r o l s  r eg re ss io n a rc hi va l d at a •• p ri ze  s pr ea d  ef fe ct s  ar e  gr ea te r  on  o ve r- re w ar de d  ac to rs  th an  o n  un de r- re w ar de d  pl ay er s •• u nd er -r ew ar de d  ac to rs  b eh av e  le ss  c oo pe ra ti ve ly  a nd  m or e  se lf is hl y  w hi le  o ve r- re w ar de d  ac to rs  b eh av e  m or e  co op er at iv el y      w ei ge lt , d uk er ic h,  &   s ch ot te r,  o rg an iz at io na l  b eh av io r  an d  h um an   d ec is io n  p ro ce ss es  ( 19 89 )   e ff or t- le ve l d ec is io ns e xp er im en ta l  gr ou p a n o v a e xp er im en t •• a ct or s  ex er t s im il ar  le ve ls  o f  ef fo rt  w he n  ab il it y  is  e qu iv al en t •• in  u nf ai r  to ur na m en ts , t he  e ff or t l ev el s  of  a dv an ta ge d  an d  di sa dv an ta ge d  ac to rs  a re  h ig h,  b ut  n ot  s ig ni fi ca nt ly  d if fe re nt   n ot e:  a n o v a  =  a na ly si s  of  v ar ia nc e;  b o d  =  b oa rd  o f  di re ct or s;  h l m  =  h ie ra rc hi ca l l in ea r  m od el in g;  o l s  =  o rd in ar y  le as t s qu ar es ; s e m  =  s tr uc tu ra l e qu at io n  m od el in g;  t m t  =  to p  m an ag e- m en t t ea m . t ab le  2  ( co n ti n u ed )  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  29 o’reilly, & pollock, 2006), and among employees at different levels within an organization  (cowherd & levine, 1992; pfeffer & davis-blake, 1987). tournament theory has been foundational to this line of research, and tournament theorists  generally argue that pay dispersion has positive effects, such as promoting competition and  providing incentives for the best to rise above others (fredrickson, davis-blake, & sanders,  2010). one early study that compared the predictions of tournament theory with a social  comparison model of ceo compensation did not find support for the tournament model  (o’reilly, main, & crystal, 1988). however, later empirical research in management jour- nals uncovered evidence in favor of the theory’s basic premises regarding compensation  structures (cappelli & cascio, 1991; conyon, peck, & sadler, 2001; devaro, 2006). these studies also show that positions at the highest levels of the organization command  disproportionate premiums relative to positions at other points in the hierarchy (conyon et  al., 2001). managers who compete in the final tournament at the highest level (i.e., ceos)  have no future horizon and therefore need to be incented in other ways. one common mecha- nism is to make the difference between winning and losing at the final level so great that  managers behave as if the tournament had an infinite number of levels (fredrickson et al.,  2010). despite reasonably consistent support for tournament theory’s main predictions, manage- ment scholars have also put forward some important boundary conditions to the theory. for  example, while tournaments with large prize spreads can motivate more effort, they may also  promote counterproductive behavior (henderson & fredrickson, 2001). others point out that  there are adverse side effects of outsized pay dispersion at the final level of the tournament,  such as reduced teamwork and poor decision making among the tmt (hayward & hambrick,  1997). consistent with this idea, kepes, delery, and gupta (2009) found that a wider pay  spread is associated with lower productivity when determined by politics. pay dispersion is  also negatively associated with turnover of the firm’s top performers when managers empha- size performance-based wage increases, but less so when managers emphasize seniority- based wage increases (shaw & gupta, 2007). management scholars may be attributed with  extending tournament theory by incorporating its potentially adverse effects on turnover  (bloom & michel, 2002). management researchers have also uncovered some unique findings about pay dispersion.  for instance, some have found that greater wage differentials are especially important as the  probability of promotion decreases (lambert et al., 1993). in addition, pay dispersion at vari- ous levels throughout the organization not only motivates employees participating in the  tournament, but can also serve as an incentive for employees outside of the immediate job  ladder who desire to be in the tournament (cappelli & cascio, 1991). some have also  explored the effects on tournament outcomes when pay dispersion varies for different partici- pants, finding that it increases the likelihood of people dropping out of the tournament  (messersmith et al., 2011). last, emerging research shows some evidence that certain share- holders appear to favor tournament-style compensation structures while others may discour- age it (connelly, haynes, et al., 2011). one limitation of research in this area of research is that, for most tournaments, the prize  is presumed to be the actors’ predominant motive. research that incorporates more complex  social understandings of actor objectives may be beneficial. for example, in herzberg’s  (1968) model, people must overcome what he refers to as “hygiene” factors before they can   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


30  journal of management / january 2014 be satisfied at work. tournament structures may create scenarios where hygiene factors are  not met, resulting in job dissatisfaction. for instance, tournaments promote competition  among participants, which can strain interpersonal relationships, create an isolated work  environment, and introduce job uncertainty. individuals vary in their pursuit of extrinsic  versus intrinsic rewards, and competitions might lower intrinsic rewards for many contes- tants (twenge, campbell, hoffman, & lance, 2010). if tournament theorists overemphasize  extrinsic, at the expense of intrinsic, rewards, the academic community may develop an  undersocialized view of tournaments that does not fully incorporate individuals’ willingness  to participate in tournaments, human factors pertaining to competition, or motivational fac- tors other than the prize. actor effort in promotion tournaments research on incentive and productivity in internal promotion contests is less ubiquitous  than that which explores compensation structures. this is likely because it is difficult to  obtain accurate data on individual performance in many jobs, which is precisely what makes  tournaments appealing as a reward mechanism in the first place. nevertheless, there is some  evidence within the management literature that individual effort increases more with com- pensation spread than with compensation levels (brown, sturman, & simmering, 2003;  pfeffer & langton, 1993; shaw, gupta, & delery, 2002), though some have also found evi- dence to the contrary (bloom, 1999) and others have sought to reconcile contradictory find- ings (beaumont & harris, 2003; jirjahn & kraft, 2007). management researchers have devoted particular attention to actor effort in tournaments  that require collaboration (bloom, 1999; siegel & hambrick, 2005). for instance, in a unique  test of ceo and tmt compensation, carpenter and sanders (2002) find that internal align- ment of tmt compensation is positively associated with success of the management team.  supporting this idea, harder (1992) examines effort expended by basketball players, finding  that over-rewarded players are more cooperative and under-rewarded players are more self- ish in their style of play. ensley, pearson, and sardeshmukh (2007) extend the notion to fam- ily firms, finding that promotion tournaments in this context can increase conflict and hinder  employee performance. this line of research has also added some unique insights to tournament theory predic- tions about differences in actor effort in promotion tournaments. for example, pfeifer (2011)  examined promotion tournaments involving mixed genders, finding that, although women  did not have a lower chance of promotion than men, there was some “negative handicapping”  that required women to fulfill higher standards for both hiring and promotion. greenwood  and empson (2003) examined promotion tournaments in an up-or-out career system. this is  unique insofar as losers do not have the opportunity to compete in further tournaments, but  these authors found that promotion incentive still proved to be a strong motivator of actor  effort. in contrast, o’neill and o’reilly (2010) examined sequential tournaments in the form  of careers, finding that heterogeneity among tournament participants (in this case, mba  graduates) leads to success for better-equipped actors in early rounds, but effort was a more  significant determinant of winning in later rounds. a key assumption underlying actor effort in tournaments is the notion of information  asymmetry between actors and principals. however, some contexts call for tournaments   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  31 wherein participants and those running the tournament work together to determine outcomes  (devaro, 2006). therefore, this area of research would benefit from further study of how  information sharing shapes actor effort, handicapping, and tournament productivity. many  tournaments, such as government requests for proposals, are structured to ensure that all  participants have exactly the same information, but scholars might seek to identify both the  antecedents and consequences of scenarios that compromise these safeguards. innovation contests tournament theory has also been an appropriate framework for explaining the structure,  design, and outcomes of innovation contests (terwiesch & xu, 2008). ideas, much like job  performance, can be difficult to measure in absolute terms, and the generation and develop- ment of ideas are certainly difficult to monitor. it is often important that actors seeking cre- ative solutions to a problem operate independently to minimize the potential for incrementalism  or building off the preconceived notions of others. taken together, these factors suggest that  tournament theory is an appropriate conceptual lens for examining innovation contests  (frick, 2003). tournament theory has been informative for the design of innovation contests  and useful for explaining the results of specific contests, such as the topcoder programming  competition (boudreau et al., 2011; terwiesch & ulrich, 2009). some have described how innovation contests can be structured to best match the nature  of the problem and objectives of the firm (morgan & wang, 2010). for example, when the  objective is to create revolutionary ideas where the solution is highly uncertain, tournaments  may yield more creative solutions when firms use large prize differentials for winners and  when they increase the number of contestants participating. in contrast, when objectives are  more evolutionary, greater rivalry is associated with decreased contestant effort, even though  it increases the likelihood that at least one contestant will find a solution (boudreau et al.,  2011). competitor heterogeneity can reduce the efforts of all contestants by discouraging the  effort of weaker competitors, who perceive increased probability of losing, and stronger  competitors, who reduce effort because of the weaker field (terwiesch & xu, 2008).  furthermore, some have described innovation as a recombination of different sets of knowl- edge and ideas, which leads to “recombinant uncertainty” (fleming, 2001). tournaments can  maximize the recombinant uncertainty of their outcomes by discouraging collaboration  among competitors. similar to findings in other applications of tournament theory, management scholars have  also found that innovation contests can generate unintended behavior. for example, the rela- tively indivisible rewards of tournaments can reduce cooperation where it is required, such  as when contestants must share common information and tools, or increase collusion between  competitors in contests such as competitive bidding processes (morgan & wang, 2010).  while scholars tend to agree that tournament theory appropriately explains innovation con- tests and their participants’ behaviors, some suggest notable departures from typical tourna- ment theory principles. for instance, some note how innovators are often motivated by  nonpecuniary prizes, such as recognition and self-satisfaction (murray & o’mahony, 2007).  others explain that tournament-style contests may not always be the most efficient means to  solve innovation problems. for instance, lakhani, lifshitz-assaf, and tushman (2012) sug- gest that innovation tournaments are best suited to scenarios where knowledge about   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


32  journal of management / january 2014 potential solutions are widely distributed but knowledge about which solutions are preferred  is concentrated, rather than vice-versa. franchising organizations that use franchising have become a central part of management research in  recent decades (combs, michael, & castrogiovanni, 2004). researchers describe how fran- chising introduces the problem of free riding, because if franchisees cut corners they receive  the immediate benefits of cost savings but share the long-term burden of dissatisfied custom- ers with the umbrella organization (brickley & dark, 1987). tournament theory describes a  solution to this problem. tournaments in franchising allow for higher levels of information  asymmetry because rewards are based on outcome, rather than process, and allow for reduced  monitoring because some monitoring is pushed down to the level of the multiunit franchise  (norton, 2003). in these tournaments, franchisors offer additional units as the prize for the best performing  franchisees (gillis et al., 2011). such a scenario is well suited to tournament theory predic- tions for a variety of reasons. identifying and monitoring franchisees is costly and difficult to  implement, so large prizes of multiple units can serve as an efficient mechanism to optimize  and rank the effort of competing franchisees (kidwell & nygaard, 2011). tournaments for  additional units serve as both reward and incentive because they bring significant wealth to  winners and improve the performance of all competing franchisees (hussain & windsperger,  2009). in fact, franchisees have been shown to exert greater effort not only because they  perceive an opportunity to win, but also because the business growth that comes from tourna- ment participation is enough of a reward (gillis et al., 2011). some might suggest that actor  independence could inhibit information flows that enable franchisors to enhance operational  effectiveness. at the same time, franchising tournaments could uncover new information,  such as the managerial ability of franchisees through regular reporting of their achievements,  and comparative benchmarking could spur franchisees on to new ideas and ways to  compete. management experiments in tournament theory a subset of studies in the management literature are focused less on applying tournament  theory in organizational contexts than advancing precepts of the theory by way of experi- ments. these appear in two main varieties: those that examine individuals (usually students)  in controlled contests and those that use sporting events as a natural experiment to understand  tournament theory principles. controlled experiments typically seek to unpack the intricacies of actor behavior in tour- naments. in an experiment on tournaments among undergraduates, weigelt, dukerich, and  schotter (1989) found that competitors choose similar levels of effort when they have equiv- alent capability. however, in unfair tournaments, where some competitors are perceived to  have an advantage, both the advantaged and disadvantaged competitors continued to exhibit  similar levels of effort. we know from prior studies that increasing prize spread increases  actor effort, but chen, ham, and lim (2011) added that even advantaged competitors increase  their effort as the prize spread expands. on the other hand, orrison, schotter, and weigelt   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  33 (2004) found that actor behavior is invariant to tournament size when the proportion of high  prizes is kept constant. in fact, their results suggest that competitors tend to reduce effort  when there is a high percentage of large prizes as compared to a more distributed prize  structure. sporting contests have informed tournament theory researchers working in a variety of  disciplines (frick, 2003), and management is no exception. for instance, bothner et al.  (2007) explore nascar crash data, finding that risk taking is more likely when there are  more individuals competing in the tournament. also, these authors find that competitive  crowding (i.e., adjusting effort to match other participants) fosters increased competitiveness  within and across levels, and crowding initiated by lower-ranked actors exacerbates aggres- siveness more so than crowding by higher-ranked actors. boyle and shapira (2011) add to the  discussion of risk preferences in tournaments by examining contestants in a game show.  they find that tournament leaders are more prone to engage in risky behavior than those fall- ing behind, and that tournament leaders focus more on their aspirations whereas laggards  shift between aspiration and survival. as managerial experiments in tournament theory move forward, one way scholars might  be able to advance our understanding would be by continuing to address, and relax, some of  the theory’s key underlying assumptions. of course, tournament theory assumes economic  actors characterized by rational decision making with complete information (lazear &  rosen, 1981). studies that inject decision constraints and managerial cognitive biases into  tournament theory’s predictive relationships would add value to this area of study. accounting  for information differences among tournament participants might yield a more complete  explanation of the productive efficiency of tournaments, and researchers may find that tour- naments arrive at suboptimal outcomes that are a function of a complex set of actor biases.  for example, the fundamental attribution error is a cognitive bias that may be particularly  consequential for hierarchical tournaments. if tournament participants have difficulty attrib- uting negative outcomes to their own behavior as opposed to external circumstances, this  could diminish the effectiveness of hierarchical tournaments and compound the likelihood of  repeated failures. key insights from other disciplines studies from other disciplines reveal important insights that, if brought to the manage- ment literature, could inform our studies and shape our understanding of how tournament  theory might be applied. we, therefore, describe recent findings from three other disciplines  and discuss the potential for cross-pollination with management research. labor economics similar to research in management, labor economists have also found empirical support  for tournament theory predictions regarding pay dispersion and actor effort (eriksson, 1999;  main et al., 1993). using a longitudinal sample of ceos of more than 600 u.s. corporations,  bognanno (2001) found evidence for tournament-like conditions, including high rates of  promotion from within and increasing pay gaps with increasing levels of hierarchy. the  study also showed that ceos received outsized rewards from promotion and their pay was   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


34  journal of management / january 2014 partly determined by the number of hierarchical levels. another study by baker, gibbs, and  holmstrom (1993) showed that increased tenure in a position resulted in a drop in real pay  for the executive. in contrast, rewards given for promotions increased with hierarchical level  at an increasing rate. in addition, labor economists continue to employ tournament theory, and more recent  studies provide new insights. for example, some have used tournament theory to help  describe why productive output often peaks after individuals are promoted within a hierar- chical organization. this is sometimes referred to as the peter principle, or the notion that  people are promoted to their level of incompetency (peter & hull, 1969). the peter principle  suggests a fundamental inefficiency in the promotion process wherein tournament partici- pants rise one level higher than they should. many have argued that performance declines  following promotion arise because individuals encounter some tasks, postpromotion, that  they are less competent of performing (dilger, 2003). lazear (2004), however, suggests this  effect is not due to an inability to perform at the final level of promotion, but instead offers a  tournament theory solution. participants win tournaments they should win (i.e., the “right”  person is promoted to the appropriate level), but then reduce effort at their final level because  they are not incented to compete for the next higher level (cf. barmby, eberth, & ma, 2011). labor economists have also begun to incorporate the economic value of winning into  tournament theory formulas. coffey and maloney (2010) study how the “thrill of victory”  matters to contestants and induces increased effort. these authors find that contestants appear  to put forth their best effort when they perceive they have a reasonable chance of winning.  related to this, brown (2011) finds that when superstars enter tournaments, “average” con- testants adjust their expectations downward and perform worse than when superstars are  absent. management researchers might consider the extent to which competition and the  thrill of victory affect organizational tournaments (e.g., salesperson-of-the-year tournaments)  and how they might interact with wage differentials to spur increased effort and performance  (franke, 2012). sport management sporting events are a natural context for examining tournament theory, and sport manage- ment scholars have advanced their own nuances of the theory. for instance, sport manage- ment research has shed light on the selection of tournaments in which actors choose to  participate (rhoads, 2007). two studies on competitive runners (lynch & zax, 2000;  maloney & mccormick, 2000) confirm that participants with greater ability are more likely  to choose tournaments with the greatest prize spread. hood (2006) adds that, for “star” play- ers, the purse is not enough because decisions to enter tournaments are determined in part by  participants’ past performance in the same tournament. human resource management schol- ars studying recruitment might be especially interested in what these findings mean for  attracting and retaining star talent in organizations. sport management researchers add that gender may moderate the incentive effects of  prize spread. some have found that men appear to be more incented by prize spread than  women (lallemand, plasman, & rycx, 2008), though others have found evidence to the con- trary and that women may be motivated by other factors (maloney & mccormick, 2000).  women may not respond as strongly to bonus payments, whereas such payment increases   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  35 performance dispersion among men (frick, 2003). management scholars might research the  extent to which these findings generalize to organizational contexts by exploring, for exam- ple, gender differences in the relationship between wage dispersion and productive output in  organizations. sport management researchers have also added to our understanding of risky or aggres- sive behavior among tournament participants. groothius, groothius, and rotthoff (2011)  show that ulterior goals, beyond the prize spread, may affect risk propensities in tourna- ments. using data from auto racing, some studies find support for a risk hypothesis that sug- gests nonlinear rewards may be associated with more risky behavior (depken & wilson,  2004; schwarts, isaacs, & carilli, 2007). management researchers might ask whether nonlin- ear reward structures increase risky behavior among employees as well. furthermore, in a  study of golfers on the pga tour, hood (2008) finds that inconsistency arising from playing  to win (a form of risky behavior) is more beneficial when the prize spread is greater. stated  differently, tournament participants win more often when they are less consistent, even with  a slightly worse-than-average performance. organizational scholars might examine whether  this is also true of individuals competing for promotions—are they more likely to win when  they adopt less consistent (riskier) behavior, even when such behavior results in lower aver- age performance? marketing given that firms spend more than $26 billion annually on sales contests, it is no surprise  that tournament theory has been a useful theoretical lens for marketing researchers as well  (garrett & gopalakrishna, 2010). the focus in this literature has been on how to create opti- mal designs of rank-order tournaments as a short-term motivational device that increases  salespeople’s efforts (kalra & shi, 2001). in addition to contests among salespeople, studies  in marketing also use tournament theory to help explain consumer behavior, intrafirm com- petition between brands, and interfirm competition for shelf space (desiraju, 2004). one way marketing researchers have contributed to tournament theory is by focusing on  tournaments where individuals compete as part of a group (kalra & shi, 2001). these studies  find that, in tournaments among groups (e.g., sales territories) of imbalanced quality, partici- pants in stronger groups exert just enough effort to match others’ effort, because they assume  that the strength of the group will secure a win (syam, hess, & yang, 2012). participants in  weaker groups exert minimal effort in deference to their diminished likelihood of winning,  resulting in shirking among both strong and weak groups (lim, ahearne, & ham, 2009).  another study examines participants’ perceptions of their group, concluding that group sat- isfaction is positively related to favorable tournament outcomes such as individual satisfac- tion and performance (grant, cravens, low, & moncrief, 2001). management researchers  would do well to incorporate aspects of group affiliation. for instance, some franchisees may  be at an inherent disadvantage in franchise tournaments if they are part of a group (e.g.,  alabama franchisees) that is not as strong or cohesive as another group (e.g., northern  california franchisees). another way marketing studies contribute to tournament theory research is by exploring  the temporal orientation of participants. for example, a recent study of sales contests among  life insurance salespeople showed that the use of rank-order tournaments resulted in better   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


36  journal of management / january 2014 short-term performance (garrett & gopalakrishna, 2010). however, using sales contests can  also lead to a reduced emphasis on building long-term customer relationships and a corre- spondingly increased use of manipulative behavior with customers. repeated contests exac- erbate the problem because they force salespeople to shortchange customer service  expectations (oliver & anderson, 1994). this line of research suggests that tournaments  reward short-term accomplishments at the expense of long-term objectives (poujol & tanner,  2009). this could have implications for management research on corporate governance.  principals have varied time horizons, some preferring short-term and others preferring long- term performance. do the former facilitate intrafirm tournaments and the latter discourage  them? if so, how do managers competing in promotion tournaments manage these competing  voices? future research: moving tournament theory forward integrating with other theories we found several studies that compare tournament theory with other theories, such as  agency theory, behavioral theory, and the managerial power model (conyon et al., 2001;  henderson & fredrickson, 2001; lambert et al., 1993; vieito, 2011), but little emphasis on  integrating it with other theories. for example, because the majority of empirical examina- tions of tournaments are centered on the extent to which winners are motivated to perform,  we anticipate that integrating insights from expectancy theory could be beneficial. expectancy  theory focuses on individuals’ motivation, asserting that it is shaped by beliefs that individual  effort can yield some level of desired performance (vroom, 1964). motivation is also shaped  by beliefs that this desired performance, in turn, is strongly related to an outcome of interest  (such as a promotion or pay raise). within expectancy theory, a key tenet is the notion of  valence, which is the extent to which an individual values an outcome (behling & starke,  1973). to integrate equity theory into tournament theory, scholars might consider differentiating  between the valence of different outcome structures (i.e., prizes such as prestige, pay, power),  and accounting for individual differences. individuals value different outcomes (twenge et  al., 2010), and certain prizes might be more important at one stage of the career (e.g., pay  early on) versus another (e.g., promotions), for males versus females, or for people across  generations. in addition, tournaments might not provide the requisite motivational power as  a tournament’s size gets too large because many tournament contestants perceive their  chances of winning are reduced and put forth less effort (coffey & maloney, 2010). an  important question for future inquiry is how tournaments, the valence of different prizes, and  tournament size work together to elicit nonlinear patterns of motivation among contestants. social network theory also holds promise for reframing the questions we ask about tour- naments. the assumptions of tournament theory are highly restrictive, which is useful for  arriving at formulaic solutions, but risky in that theory can become divorced from social  realities (baker et al., 1988; nippa, 2010). managers often work in teams, which makes rank- ing difficult. moreover, winners and losers in intraorganizational tournaments, unlike sport  competitions, have to continue to work together (main et al., 1993). incorporating constructs  and relationships from social network theory could help place tournaments more squarely  within their organizational contexts. social network theorists might describe tournament   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  37 participants in terms of their centrality (number of social connections to other tournament  participants) or access to structural holes (extent to which they connect disconnected others;  borgatti & foster, 2003). one way social network theory might inform tournament theory is by exploring the influ- ence of the social characteristics of participants on tournament outcomes. for instance, par- ticipants with higher degree centrality might leverage their position to improve their odds of  winning and could be more prone to collusion or cooperative behavior that decreases effi- ciency of the tournament. in a network characterized by a “small world” topology, there  could be important differences between tournament participants who reside at the network  core as opposed to those who reside near the periphery, especially if peripheral actors are  more prone to risky behavior (krackhardt, 1997). one might also examine the role of struc- tural holes on tournament outcomes. if actors in an innovation tournament have many con- nections that are all connected to each other, it could result in high levels of “echo,” where  contestants confirm one another’s presuppositions and are less likely to innovate based on  unique information (burt, 2005). last, signaling theory could improve our understanding of tournaments and how they are  affected by the flow of information (spence, 1973). a foundational assumption of tourna- ment theory is information asymmetry among participants (i.e., actor independence) and  between participants and principals. signaling theory describes how parties might overcome  that asymmetry by communicating about unobservable qualities via observable signals  (connelly, certo, ireland, & reutzel, 2011). to use signaling theory, some actors must want  to communicate information about how they are better than others (spence, 2002), so it  becomes especially pertinent as researchers incorporate actor heterogeneity into tournament  models. signaling in tournaments could make them either more or less efficient. tournament  results are determined by outcomes rather than process, which is why they reduce monitoring  costs. however, if participants signal principals about the process, or ways in which out- comes may not reflect participants’ true unobservable quality, they could improve the accu- racy of tournament rankings. for instance, contestants who ranked second in a promotion  contest could send signals about some inordinately adverse conditions under which they had  to compete, suggesting their ranking should be weighted higher. this form of signaling could  improve the efficiency of tournaments if signals are costly and honest. at the same time,  heterogeneous actors could also signal competitors about their superior ability and likelihood  of winning the contest, which would have adverse effects on overall productivity of the  tournament. applying in new contexts most empirical tournament theory research in the management literature examines indi- vidual-level tournaments, leaving open the opportunity for applying tournament theory to  business-unit and firm-level phenomena. one important application that appears to have  been overlooked revolves around internal capital decisions. the bcg and ge mckinsey  stoplight matrices reveal that many firms have competitions among business units.  tournament theory could help explain optimum competitive parameters, handicapping, or  how such tournaments compare with more equitable distribution of resources. other   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


38  journal of management / january 2014 applications of tournament theory at the business unit level could include decisions about  where to locate value chain activities, what businesses will be divested, or which units receive  choice resources (e.g., office space). research leveraging tournament theory’s tenets to examine interfirm competitions is also  needed. for example, anecdotal evidence suggests that many entrepreneurs start businesses  with the purpose of eventually selling them (i.e., via an exit strategy). tournament theory  might be useful for exploring how acquirers screen potential targets. buyers may use tourna- ments to motivate entrepreneurs, since they cannot monitor the effort of entrepreneurs but  can rank their outcomes. other interfirm applications of tournament theory might include a  tournament of suppliers that are competing to be selected, alliance partners competing for  greater participation with a firm, or publicly traded firms competing for the highest quality,  long-term investors. within the firm, management researchers might use tournament theory to consider new  forms of contests among individuals, such as expatriates competing for plumb assignments  or directors competing in a tournament for additional directorships. we also did not find  tournament theory research employing multiple levels analysis. scholars might examine how  a tournament among individual scientists for resources in a research organization interacts,  or interferes, with tournaments among business units within the same organization. some  organizations may create cultures where tournaments are an accepted practice and an inte- grated part of the company at all levels. researchers might consider, therefore, the difficulty  of introducing tournaments in organizational climates that are unfamiliar with them. one potentially interesting context from a data collection perspective is the military,  which is characterized by a strong need for coordination and a hierarchical promotion sys- tem. we can think of few contexts requiring more cooperation than large deployments to  dangerous parts of the world. military service members could be motivated in part by pay,  but they are likely to be motivated by other factors as well. to the extent that military promo- tion contests invoke competition instead of cooperation, harmful outcomes could occur. globalizing its predictive relationships a growing body of literature shows that pay dispersion, which historically is tournament  theory’s central focus, appears to be spreading globally (oxelheim & randoy, 2005). one  reason is that international entries often force firms to compensate their executives at higher  levels as a result of previously imposed tournaments. for example, at the time of its acquisi- tion, the ceo of u.s.-based chrysler was paid eight times more than the ceo of its german  acquirer, daimler. although the ratio of ceo-to-worker pay is still an order of magnitude  greater in the united states than elsewhere, many countries are moving closer to u.s. mod- els. this suggests that the united states may effectively be exporting pay practices to other  countries, so scholars would do well to consider how tournaments might emerge in other  countries and cultures (wahlgren, 2001). when applying theories globally, researchers have found it helpful to consider a coun- try’s formal institutions, such as laws and regulations, and informal institutions, such as  norms and values (north, 1990; scott, 1995). we expect that both formal and informal  institutions could play a key role in the extent to which firms employ tournament-based  compensation structures. research shows that formal institutions often exhibit strong   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  39 pressures on firm policies and practices (holmes, miller, hitt, & salmador, 2013). formal  institutions that are particularly relevant include those laws and regulations that govern the  exchange of labor for pay, minimum level of wages, working hours, hiring and firing of  employees, taxation and benefits, and rights to unionize. extensive formal constraints of  this nature could make it more difficult for firms to use compensation tournaments.  informal institutions may also be important to pay differentials in compensation tourna- ments (tosi & greckhamer, 2004). studies examining the effects of informal institutions  have shown that justice norms vary in different national and organizational cultures, and  societal values and beliefs are often incorporated into organizational practices and codes of  conduct (cowherd & levine, 1992). therefore, it is reasonable to expect that national  cultural values will influence the economic value participants ascribe to a tournament’s  prize spread (e.g., osberg & smeeding, 2006). country-level formal institutions may affect other types of tournaments as well. for  example, a growing body of literature suggests that firms engage the political system through  politicians to cultivate relationships (lux, crook, & woehr, 2011). this raises the question of  whether a country’s formal institutions foster or inhibit politicians from establishing behind- the-scenes tournaments that reward firms (e.g., with a prize of contracts or favorable policy)  for their lobbying and campaign contributions. in addition, politicians may set up tourna- ments between countries to attract foreign direct investment, and again here a country’s for- mal institutions could play an important role in determining the efficiency of such tournaments.  formal institutions may also affect different types of tournaments by changing the likelihood  of winning. in many countries, foreign firms have to work with a domestic partner to enter  the market (tang, 1990). doing so could force foreign firms to engage partners for their  political connections, increasing their likelihood of winning but decreasing productive out- put of the tournament. country-level informal institutions may also have far-reaching implications for other  types of tournaments. evidence suggests that tournament prizes might be less important  motivators, and even frowned upon, in some cultures. earley and gibson (1998) showed that  individualists and collectivists have different preferences for rewards; individualists prefer  compensation based on their singular input, but collectivists prefer more equitable, group- based prize structures, regardless of input (hofstede, 2001). thus, a key question for research- ers is the extent to which prize spreads maximize productive efficiency of tournaments in  individualistic as compared to collectivist cultures. related to this, one might ask whether  prize spreads are more consequential when actors compete against people from the same  cultural background. another potentially important implication of country-level effects of tournaments  involves the outcome effects on subsequent turnover, or who remains after a tournament  concludes. high performers generally turn over at higher rates than low performers, though  these effects can be mitigated by compensation (trevor, gerhart, & boudreau, 1997).  recent evidence suggests that the relationship between individual performance and turn- over varies across countries; a key implication is that the potential for tournaments to affect  turnover, and by extension performance, may be limited in other cultures (sturman, shao,  & katz, 2012). because most studies invoking tournament theory involve large u.s.-based  firms, samples from a wider array of countries could uncover different results or country- level effects.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


40  journal of management / january 2014 developing a typology of tournaments while researchers have applied tournament theory to a range of contexts, the literature  may be at a point where it would be useful to develop taxonomies (classification by numeri- cally defined observable characteristics) and typologies (conceptually based, intuitive group- ings) of tournaments (rich, 1992). classification of organizational phenomena has a long  history in organizational analysis and has frequently served as an important aid for compari- son, theory development, and hypothesis testing (bell & kozlowski, 2002; rohm &  swaminathan, 2004). in table 3, we offer one possible way of doing so, cataloging tourna- ments into five types corresponding roughly with the tournament reward. the basic typology we propose is a set of monothetic groups built around observable  characteristics and intuitive categorization, or an “essential-traditional” typology (rich,  1992). such typologies can provide the basis for midrange theorizing about  table 3 proposed typology of tournaments tournament type description example need-based actors compete for the reward of  resources or access to needed resources,  with the possibility of multiple or  divisible rewards. resources are  desirable but scarce, so tournaments are  a logical means of distributing them. competitions among departments, strategic  business units seeking capital, or fledgling  firms competing for potential buyers. competence-based actors are not necessarily trying to win,  but instead are trying not to lose; the  reward is punishment avoidance. the managerial contests of ge’s “neutron  jack” welch, who annually fired the bottom  10% of employees. also, prospective  university students who seek to clear a bar by  attaining requisite grade point averages and  test scores. activating the reward for this type of contest is  intrinsic or status-oriented. these  tournaments are “activating” in the  sense that being a winner is a reward in  itself, so that prize spread is of marginal  importance. salesman-of-the-year contests or best-teacher  awards in business schools. winner-take-all there is an indivisible final prize, such  as money or a new position. these  are most consistent with the original  context in which tournament theory  was developed, where contestants  sacrifice some level of compensation  or benefits in their current state in the  hope of winning the much larger reward  associated with the next higher state. members of a tmt who compete for the job  of ceo. hierarchical tournaments where an actor’s main  goal is to advance to the next highest  tournament. mid- or entry-level employees compete to be  promoted to increasingly higher levels within  an organization, or franchisees seek rights  from franchisors to build additional units. note: tmt = top management team.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  41 the relationships and forces at work on specific types and be a precursor to the eventual  development of polythetic typologies (bailey, 1973). future research might seek to vali- date our proposed typology by empirically examining its utility and accuracy in represent- ing reality (harzing, 2000), or scholars might attempt to create more subtle or  multidimensional typologies. identifying antecedents and boundary conditions while research has focused mainly on the tournament outcomes, the literature would ben- efit from further consideration of its antecedents. that is, when is tournament theory most  appropriate? scholars have begun to describe some of the most basic factors under which the  theory is most likely to be most useful (frick, 2003; morgan & wang, 2010). for example,  tournaments are effective in situations where the effort of individual actors is difficult or  expensive to monitor and when performance is difficult to judge in absolute terms. this is  because rewards are allocated by rank order, so one does not need to evaluate the actor’s  processes or level of effort. tournaments are also best suited to scenarios where rewards are  relatively indivisible. in addition, tournaments are apropos for scenarios wherein the system  is subjected to common underlying externalities, such as technical breakdowns, economic  cycles, or environmental shocks, because all actors are subjected to the same uncertain con- ditions. future research might explore a richer set of antecedents, such as personality charac- teristics of the participants, administrative heritage of the organization, time horizon of a  tournament’s principals, or industry norms and approaches taken by competitors. conversely, it would be important to further our understanding of the theory’s boundary  conditions. that is, in which scenarios is tournament theory more limited? one, discussed ear- lier, is that tournaments do not appear useful when cooperation is needed for interdependent  work situations (pfeffer & langton, 1993; siegel & hambrick, 2005). because tournaments  fuel contestant competition (henderson & fredrickson, 2001), caution should be used in struc- turing pay when interdependence is central to a task at hand. another is that tournament theory  may not be well suited to describe how to motivate individuals to expend effort over the long  haul (poujol & tanner, 2009). although tournaments encourage strong short-term effort from  contestants, the theory does not explain how to continue to motivate winners once a tournament  concludes, especially if winners have achieved the highest rank. last, tournaments may be less  useful in scenarios where participants identify themselves with tournament outcomes and are  likely to make social comparisons with other participants. in these situations, participants are  unable to divorce their performance in the tournament with their own self-worth, which could  reduce tournament productivity owning to perceived unfairness and increased political behav- ior (kepes et al., 2009; vroom, 1964). in table 4, we provide a matrix of potential research  questions wherein we overlay these directions for future research onto the five substantive  domains of tournament theory research in management. conclusion lazear (1998) observed that “the salary of the vice president acts not so much as moti- vation for the vice president as it does as motivation for the assistant vice presidents” (p. 226).  tournament theory provides a testable means of explaining why firms use escalating   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


42 t ab le  4 d ir ec ti on s  fo r  f u tu re  r es ea rc h d ir ec ti on s  fo r  f ut ur e  r es ea rc h s ub st an ti ve  d om ai n in te gr at in g  w it h  o th er  t he or ie s a pp ly in g  in  n ew  c on te xt s g lo ba li zi ng  p re di ct iv e  r el at io ns hi ps d ev el op in g  a  t yp ol og y  of   t ou rn am en ts a nt ec ed en ts  a nd  b ou nd ar y  c on di ti on s p ay  d is pe rs io n w ha t s ig na ls  ( po si ti ve  o r  ne ga ti ve )  do  th e  w id en in g  pa y  ga ps   as so ci at ed  w it h  to ur na m en ts  s en d  to  c ap it al  m ar ke ts ? d oe s  pa y  di sp er si on  b et w ee n  ac ad em ic s  an d  ad m in is tr at or s  in  h ig he r  ed uc at io n  af fe ct  th e  pr od uc ti ve  o ut pu t o f  fa cu lt y  m em be rs  ( e. g. , r es ea rc h) ? a re  u .s . i ns ti tu ti on al  in ve st or s  “e xp or ti ng ”  to ur na m en t- st yl e  pa y  pr ac ti ce s  to  f ir m s  th ey   ow n  ov er se as ? h ow  d oe s  ho ri zo nt al  p ay   di sp er si on  a m on g  a  t m t   in te ra ct  w it h  ve rt ic al  p ay   di sp er si on  ( be tw ee n  c e o  a nd   t m t )  in  a  w in ne r- ta ke -a ll   to ur na m en t? is  w id e  c e o -t o- w or ke r  pa y  us ef ul  in  s om e  in du st ri es  b ut   no t o th er s,  o r  ev en  p re fe rr ed   by  s om e  pr in ci pa ls  b ut  n ot   ot he rs ? a ct or  e ff or t d o  m or e  ce nt ra l a ct or s  le ve ra ge   th ei r  po si ti on  to  d is co ur ag e  co m pe ti ti on  in  p ro m ot io n  to ur na m en ts ? h ow  u se fu l a re  p ro m ot io n  to ur na m en ts  in  th e  m il it ar y  fo r  in du ci ng  e ff or t i n  hi gh - ri sk  ( i.e .,  li fe -t hr ea te ni ng )  en vi ro nm en ts ? a re  to ur na m en ts  in  c ol le ct iv is t  cu lt ur es  le ss  e ff ec ti ve  a t  in du ci ng  e ff or t t ha n  th os e  in   in di vi du al is ti c  cu lt ur es ? h ow  e ff ec ti ve  is  p ri ze  s pr ea d  fo r  in du ci ng  e ff or t i n  ac ti va ti ng   an d  co m pe te nc e- ba se d  to ur na m en ts  v er su s  w in ne r- ta ke -a ll  to ur na m en ts ? d o  pa rt ic ip an ts  r ed uc e  ef fo rt   in  to ur na m en ts  w he re   in fo rm at io n  as ym m et ry   (b et w ee n  ac to rs )  is  lo w  b ut   in fo rm at io n  un ce rt ai nt y  is   hi gh ? in no va ti on  c on te st s a re  in no va ti on  c on te st s  am on g  a  “s m al l w or ld ”  of  p ar ti ci pa nt s  le ss   ef fe ct iv e  th an  m or e  di sp er se d  ne tw or ks ? h ow  e ff ec ti ve  a re  in no va ti on   to ur na m en ts  th at  o cc ur  p re - ip o  a s  co m pa re d  to  p os t- ip o ? h ow  c an  s of tw ar e  co nt es ts   ha nd ic ap  p ar ti ci pa nt s  to   le ve l t he  p la yi ng  f ie ld  f or   pa rt ic ip an ts  f ro m  m ul ti pl e  co un tr ie s? w hi ch  ty pe s  of  to ur na m en ts   ar e  be st  s ui te d  to  d ev el op in g  re vo lu ti on ar y  ou tc om es ? h ow  d oe s  re w ar d  di vi si bi li ty   af fe ct  to ur na m en t  pa rt ic ip at io n  an d  ou tc om es ? f ra nc hi si ng h ow  c an  f ra nc hi so rs  u se  v al en ce  o f  di ff er en t o ut co m es  to  m ax im iz e  ef fi ci en cy  o f  to ur na m en ts  a m on g  fr an ch is ee s? h ow  e ff ec ti ve  a re  to ur na m en ts   am on g  fr an ch is ee s  fo r  ea rl y- st ag e  ve rs us  la te -s ta ge   fr an ch is es ? h ow  d o  na ti on al  b or de rs   af fe ct  c om pe ti ti on  a m on g  fr an ch is ee s  fo r  m ul ti un it   aw ar ds ? d o  co m pe te nc e- ba se d  to ur na m en ts  a m on g  fr an ch is ee s  ha ve  n eg at iv e  lo ng -t er m  e ff ec ts ? a re  s om e  fo rm s  of  f ra nc hi si ng   le ss  w el l s ui te d  to   to ur na m en ts  th an  o th er s? e xp er im en ts  in   to ur na m en t t he or y a re  p er ip he ra l o r  co re  a ct or s  in  a   to ur na m en t m or e  pr on e  to  r is k- ta ki ng  b eh av io rs ? h ow  e ff ec ti ve  a re  to ur na m en ts   am on g  in di vi du al s  w it h  va ry in g  co gn it iv e  ab il it y  or   w it h  ce rt ai n  sp li nt er  s ki ll s? h ow  m ig ht  to ur na m en t t he or y  pr ed ic ti on s  be  a ff ec te d  by   pa rt ic ip an ts  w it h  va st ly   di ff er en t c ul tu ra l b ia se s? a re  p ar ti ci pa nt s  w it h  di ff er en t  pe rs on al it y  ch ar ac te ri st ic s  at tr ac te d  (o r  av er se )  to  c er ta in   ty pe s  of  to ur na m en ts ? a re  to ur na m en ts  th at  m im ic   ot he rs  m or e,  o r  le ss ,  ef fe ct iv e  th an  f ir st -m ov er   to ur na m en ts ?  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  43 compensation structures and, more broadly, helps explain the design and governance of  rank-order competitions. over the past three decades, researchers have expanded its use to  a broad array of contests, and studies in many disciplines have imported the ideas to help  explain their own phenomena (cherry & ellis, 2005; price, 2003). we hope our review  makes tournament theory more accessible to management researchers and leads them to  broaden their use of the theory when studying the eclectic range of contests that occur  within and between organizations. references adamczyk, s., bullinger, a. c., & moslein, k. m. 2012. innovation contests: a review, classification and outlook.  creativity and innovation management, 21: 335-360. afl-cio. 2013. ceo pay and you. retrieved from http://www.aflcio.org/corporate-watch/ceo-pay-and-the-99 anabtawi, i. 2005. explaining pay without performance: the tournament alternative. emory law journal, 54: 1557- 1602. bailey, k. d. 1973. monothetic and polythetic typologies and their relation to conceptualization, measurement and  scaling. american sociological review, 38: 18-33. baker, g., gibbs, m., & holmstrom, b. 1993. hierarchies and compensation: a case study. european economic  review, 37: 366-378. baker, g. p., jensen, m. c., & murphy, k. j. 1988. compensation and incentives: theory versus practice. journal  of finance, 43: 593-616. barmby, r., eberth, b., & ma, a. 2011. incentives, learning, task difficulty, and the peter principle: interpreting  individual output changes in an organizational hierarchy. labour economics, 19: 76-81. beaumont, p. b., & harris, r. i. d. 2003. internal wage structures and organizational performance. british journal  of industrial relations, 41: 53-70. becker, b. e., & huselid, m. a. 1992. the incentive effects of tournament compensation systems. administrative  science quarterly, 37: 336-350. behling, o., & starke, f. a. 1973. the postulates of expectancy theory. academy of management journal, 16:  373-388. bell, b. s., & kozlowski, s. w. 2002. a typology of virtual teams implications for effective leadership. group &  organization management, 27: 14-49. bloom, m. 1999. the performance effects of pay dispersion on individuals and organizations. academy of  management journal, 42: 25-40. bloom, m., & michel, j. g. 2002. the relationships among organizational context, pay dispersion, and among  managerial turnover. academy of management journal, 45: 33-42. bognanno, m. l. 2001. corporate tournaments. journal of labor economics, 19: 290-315. borgatti, s. p., & foster, p. c. 2003. the network paradigm in organizational research: a review and typology.  journal of management, 29: 991-1013. bothner, m. s., kang, j., & stuart, t. e. 2007. competitive crowding and risk taking in a tournament: evidence  from nascar racing. administrative science quarterly, 52: 208-247. boudreau, k. j., lacetera, n., & lakhani, k. r. 2011. incentives and problem uncertainty in innovation contests:  an empirical analysis. management science, 57: 843-863. boudreau, k. j., & lakhani, k. r. 2009. how to manage outside innovation. mit sloan management review, 50(4):  69-76. boyle, e., & shapira, z. 2011. the liability of leading: battling aspiration and survival goals in the jeopardy!  tournament of champions. organization science, 23: 1100-1113. brickley, j. a., & dark, f. h. 1987. the choice of organizational form: the case of franchising. journal of financial  economics, 18: 401-420. brown, j. 2011. quitters never win: the (adverse) incentive effects of competing with superstars. journal of  political economy, 119: 982-1013. brown, m. p., sturman, m. c., & simmering, m. j. 2003. compensation policy and organizational performance: the  efficiency, operational, and financial implications of pay levels and pay structure. academy of management  journal, 46: 752-762.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


44  journal of management / january 2014 bull, c., schotter, a., & weigelt, k. 1987. tournaments and piece rates: an experimental study. journal of political  economy, 95: 1-33. burt, r. s. 2005. brokerage and closure: an introduction to social capital. oxford, uk: oxford university press. cappelli, p., & cascio, w. f. 1991. why some jobs command wage premiums: a test of career tournament and  internal labor market hypotheses. academy of management journal, 34: 848-868. carpenter, m. a., & sanders, w. m. g. 2002. top management team compensation: the missing link between ceo  pay and firm performance. strategic management journal, 23: 367-375. carpenter, m. a., & sanders, w. m. g. 2004. the effects of top management team pay and firm internationalization  on mnc performance. journal of management, 30: 509-528. che, y.-k., & gale, i. 2003. optimal design of research contests. american economic review, 93: 646-671. chen, h., ham, s. h., & lim, n. 2011. designing multi-person tournaments with asymmetric contestants: an  experimental study. management science, 57: 864-883. cherry, t. l., & ellis, l. v. 2005. does rank-order grading improve student performance? evidence from a class- room experiment. international review of economics education, 4: 9-19. choi, s., & gulati, m. 2004. choosing the next supreme court justice: an empirical ranking of judicial perfor- mance. berkeley: university of california, berkeley, boalt hall. coffey, b., & maloney, m. t. 2010. the thrill of victory: measuring the incentive to win. journal of labor  economics, 28: 87-112. combs, j. g., ketchen, d. j., & short, j. c. 2011. franchising research: major milestones, new directions, and its  future within entrepreneurship. entrepreneurship theory & practice, 35: 413-425. combs, j. g., michael, s. c., & castrogiovanni, g. j. 2004. franchising: a review and avenues to greater theoretical  diversity. journal of management, 30: 907-931. connelly, b. l., certo, s. t., ireland, r. d., & reutzel, c. r. 2011. signaling theory: a review and assessment.  journal of management, 37: 39-67. connelly, b. l., haynes, k., tihanyi, l., & devers, c. 2011. exporting pay practices: the influence of u.s. institu- tional investors on global pay inequality. paper presented at the annual meeting of the strategic management  society, miami, fl. conyon, m. j., peck, s. i., & sadler, g. v. 2001. corporate tournaments and executive compensation: evidence  from the u.k. strategic management journal, 22: 805-815. cowherd, d. m., & levine, d. i. 1992. product quality and pay equity between lower-level employees and top  management: an investigation of distributive justice theory. administrative science quarterly, 37: 302-320. depken, c. a., & wilson, d. p. 2004. the efficiency of the nascar reward system: initial empirical evidence.  journal of sports economics, 5: 371-386. desiraju, r. 2004. costs and benefits of inducing intrabrand competition: the role of limited liability. marketing  science, 23: 429-450. devaro, j. 2006. strategic promotion tournaments and worker performance. strategic management journal, 27:  721-740. dilger, a. 2003. lazear’s stochastic interpretation of the peter principle: an empirical examination based on nba- data. working paper no. op 7, university of vienna organization and planning. earley, p. c., & gibson, c. b. 1998. taking stock in our progress on individualism-collectivism: 100 years of soli- darity and community. journal of management, 24: 265-304. ehrenberg, r. g., & bognanno, m. l. 1990. the incentive effects of tournaments revisited: evidence from the  european pga tour. industrial and labor relations review, 43: 74s-88s. ensley, m. d., pearson, a. w., & sardeshmukh, s. r. 2007. the negative consequences of pay dispersion in family  and non-family top management teams: an exploratory analysis of new venture, high-growth firms. journal of  business research, 60: 1039-1047. eriksson, t. 1999. executive compensation and tournament theory: empirical tests on danish data. journal of  labor economics, 17: 262-280. fleming, l. 2001. recombinant uncertainty in technological search. management science, 47: 117-132. franke, j. 2012. the incentive effects of leveling the playing field: an empirical analysis of amateur golf tourna- ments. applied economics, 44: 1193-1200. fredrickson, j. w., davis-blake, a., & sanders, w. m. g. 2010. sharing the wealth: social comparisons and pay  dispersion in the ceo’s top team. strategic management journal, 31: 1031-1053. frick, b. 2003. contest theory and sport. oxford review of economic policy, 19: 512-529. garrett, j., & gopalakrishna, s. 2010. customer value impact of sales contests. journal of marketing, 38: 775-786.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  45 gibbs, m. 1994. testing tournaments? an appraisal of the theory and evidence. labor law journal, 45: 493-493. gillis, w. e., mcewan, e., crook, t. r., & michael, s. c. 2011. using tournaments to reduce agency problems: the  case of franchising. entrepreneurship theory & practice, 35: 427-447. gomez-mejia, l., trevino, l. j., & mixon, f. g. 2009. winning the tournament for named professorships in man- agement. international journal of human resource management, 20: 1843-1863. grant, k., cravens, d. w., low, g. s., & moncrief, w. c. 2001. the role of satisfaction with territory design on  the motivation, attitudes, and work outcomes of salespeople. journal of the academy of marking science, 29:  165-178. greenwood, r., & empson, l. 2003. the professional partnership: relic or exemplary form of governance?  organization studies, 24: 909-933. groothius, p. a., groothius, j. d., & rotthoff, k. w. 2011. time on camera: an additional explanation of nascar  tournaments. journal of sports economics, 12: 561-570. gupta, n., conroy, s. a., & delery, j. e. 2012. the many faces of pay variation. human resource management  review, 22: 100-115. harder, j. w. 1992. play for pay: effects of inequity in a pay-for-performance context. administrative science  quarterly, 37: 321-335. harford, t. 2006. why your boss is overpaid. retrieved from http://www.forbes.com/2009/02/19/pay-boss- compensation-leadership-compensation_tim_harford.html harzing, a. w. 2000. an empirical analysis and extension of the bartlett and ghoshal typology of multinational  companies. journal of international business studies, 31: 101-120. hayward, m. l. a., & hambrick, d. c. 1997. explaining the premiums paid for large acquisitions: evidence of  ceo hubris. administrative science quarterly, 42: 103-127. henderson, a. d., & fredrickson, j. w. 2001. tmt coordination needs and the ceo pay gap: a competitive test of  economic and behavioral views. academy of management journal, 44: 96-117. herzberg, f. 1968. work and the nature of man. london, uk: staples press. hofstede, g. 2001. culture’s consequences: comparing values, behaviors, institutions, and organizations across  nations (2nd ed.). thousand oaks, ca: sage. holmes, r. m., miller, t., hitt, m. a., & salmador, m. p. 2013. the interrelationships among informal institutions,  formal institutions, and inward foreign direct investment. journal of management, 39: 531-566. hood, m. 2006. the purse is not enough: modeling professional golfers’ entry decision. journal of sports  economics, 7: 289-308. hood, m. 2008. consistency on the pga tour. journal of sports economics, 9: 504-519. hussain, d., & windsperger, j. 2009. multi-unit ownership strategy in franchising: development of an integrative  model. journal of marketing channels, 17: 3-31. jirjahn, u., & kraft, k. 2007. intra-firm wage dispersion and firm performance—is there a uniform relationship?  kyklos, 60: 231-253. kale, j. r., reis, e., & venkateswaran, a. 2009. rank-order tournaments and incentive alignment: the effect on  firm performance. journal of finance, 64: 1479-1512. kalra, a., & shi, m. 2001. designing optimal sales contests: a theoretical perspective. marketing science, 20:  170-193. kepes, s., delery, j., & gupta, n. 2009. contingencies in the effects of pay range on organizational effectiveness.  personnel psychology, 62: 497-531. kidwell, r. e., & nygaard, a. 2011. a strategic deviance perspective on the franchise form of organizing.  entrepreneurship theory & practice, 35: 467-482. knoeber, c. r. 1989. real game of chickens: contracts, tournaments, and the production of broilers. journal of  law, economics and organization, 5: 271-292. knoeber, c. r., & thurman, w. n. 1994. testing the theory of tournaments: an empirical analysis of broiler pro- duction. journal of labor economics, 12: 155-179. krackhardt, d. 1997. organizational viscosity and the diffusion of controversial innovations. journal of  mathematical sociology, 22: 177-199. lakhani, k., lifshitz-assaf, h., & tushman, m. 2012. open innovation and organizational boundaries: the impact  of task decomposition and knowledge distribution on the locus of innovation. working paper no: 12-057,  harvard business school, technology & operations management. lallemand, t., plasman, r., & rycx, f. 2008. women and competition in elimination tournaments: evidence from  professional tennis data. journal of sports economics, 9: 3-19.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


46  journal of management / january 2014 lambert, r. a., larcker, d. f., & weigelt, k. 1993. the structure of organizational incentives. administrative  science quarterly, 38: 438-461. lazear, e. p. 1998. personnel economics for managers. new york: john wiley. lazear, e. p. 1999. personnel economics: past lessons and future directions. journal of labor economics, 17: 199-236. lazear, e. p. 2004. the peter principle: a theory of decline. journal of political economy, 112: s141-s163. lazear, e. p., & rosen, s. 1981. rank-order tournaments as optimum labor contracts. journal of political economy,  89: 841-865. levitt, s. d., & dubner, s. j. 2009. superfreakonomics. new york: harpercollins. lim, n., ahearne, m. j., & ham, s. h. 2009. designing sales contests: does the prize structure matter? journal of  marketing research, 46: 356-371. lux, s., crook, t. r., & woehr, d. j. 2011. mixing business with politics: a meta-analysis of the antecedents and  outcomes of corporate political activity. journal of management, 37: 223-247. lynch, j. g., & zax, j. s. 2000. the rewards to running prize structure and performance in professional road racing.  journal of sports economics, 1: 323-340. main, b. g. m., o’reilly, c. a., & wade, j. 1993. top executive pay: tournament or teamwork? journal of labor  economics, 11: 606-628. maloney, m. t., & mccormick, r. e. 2000. the response of workers to wages in tournaments: evidence from foot  races. journal of sports economics, 1: 99-123. mclaughlin, k. j. 1988. aspects of tournament models: a survey. research in labor economics, 9: 225-256. messersmith, j. g., guthrie, j. p., ji, y. y., & lee, j. y. 2011. executive turnover: the influence of dispersion and  other pay system characteristics. journal of applied psychology, 96: 457-469. moldovanu, b., sela, a., & shi, x. 2007. contests for status. journal of political economy, 115: 338-363. morgan, j., & wang, r. 2010. tournament for ideas. california management review, 52: 77-97. murray, f., & o’mahony, s. 2007. exploring the foundations of cumulative innovation: implications for organiza- tion science. organization science, 18: 1006-1021. nalebuff, b., & stiglitz, j. 1983. prizes and incentives: towards a general theory of compensation and competition.  bell journal of economics, 2: 21-43. nieken, p., & sliwka, d. 2010. risk-taking tournaments: theory and experimental evidence. journal of economic  psychology, 31: 254-268. nippa, m. 2010. on the need to extend tournament theory through insights from status research. in j. l. pearce  (ed.), status in management and organizations: 118-152. new york: cambridge university press. north, d. 1990. institutions, institutional change and economic performance. cambridge, uk: cambridge  university press. norton, s. w. 2003. towards a more general theory of franchise governance. in j. windsperger, g. cliquet, g.  hendrikse, & m. tuunanen (eds.), economics and management of franchising networks: 17-35. new york:  physica-verlag heidelberg. o’keeffe, m., viscusi, w. k., & zeckhauser, r. j. 1984. economic contests: comparative reward schemes. journal  of labor economics, 2: 27-56. oliver, r. l., & anderson, e. 1994. an empirical test of the consequences of behavior- and outcome-based sales  control systems. journal of marketing, 58(4): 53-67. o’neill, o. a., & o’reilly, c. a. 2010. careers as tournaments: the impact of sex and gendered organizational  culture preferences on mbas’ income attainment. journal of organizational behavior, 31: 856-876. o’reilly, c. a., main, b. g., & crystal, g. s. 1988. ceo compensation as tournament and social comparison: a  tale of two theories. administrative science quarterly, 33: 257-274. orrison, a., schotter, a., & weigelt, k. 2004. multiperson tournaments: an experimental examination. management  science, 50: 1-10. osberg, l., & smeeding, t. 2006. “fair” inequality? attitudes toward pay differentials: the united states in com- parative perspective. american sociological review, 71: 450-473. oxelheim, l., & randoy, t. 2005. the effects of internationalization on ceo compensation. journal of international  business studies, 36: 470-483. peter, l. j., & hull, r. 1969. the peter principle: why things always go wrong. new york: morrow. pfeffer, j., & davis-blake, a. 1987. understanding organizational wage structures: a resource dependence  approach. academy of management journal, 30: 437-455. pfeffer, j., & langton, n. 1993. the effect of wage dispersion on satisfaction, productivity, and working collabora- tively: evidence from college and university faculty. administrative science quarterly, 38: 382-407.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


connelly et al. / tournament theory  47 pfeifer, c. 2011. handicaps in job assignment: insiders, outsiders and gender. journal of labor research, 32: 1-20. poujol, f. j., & tanner, j. f. 2009. the impact of contests on salespeople’s customer orientation: an application of  tournament theory. journal of personal selling and sales management, 30: 33-46. price, b. m. 2003. how green was my valley? an examination of tournament theory as a governance mechanism in  silicon valley law firms. law & society review, 37: 731-764. rhoads, t. a. 2007. labor supply on the pga tour: the effect of higher expected earnings and stricter exemption  status on annual entry decisions. journal of sports economics, 8: 83-98. rich, p. 1992. the organizational taxonomy: definition and design. academy of management review, 17: 758-781. rohm, a. j., & swaminathan, v. 2004. a typology of online shoppers based on shopping motivations. journal of  business research, 57: 748-757. rosen, s. 1986. prizes and incentives in elimination tournaments. american economic review, 76: 701-715. rosenbaum, j. e. 1979. tournament mobility: career patterns in a corporation. administrative science quarterly,  24: 220-241. schwarts, j. t., isaacs, j. p., & carilli, a. m. 2007. to race or to place? an empirical investigation of the efficiency  of the nascar points competition. journal of sports economics, 8: 633-641. scott, w. r. 1995. institutions and organizations. thousand oaks, ca: sage. shaw, j. d., & gupta, n. 2007. pay system characteristics and quit patterns of good, average, and poor performers.  personnel psychology, 60: 903-928. shaw, j. d., gupta, n., & delery, j. e. 2002. pay dispersion and workforce performance: moderating effects of  incentives and interdependence. strategic management journal, 23: 491-512. siegel, p. a., & hambrick, d. c. 2005. pay disparities within top management groups: evidence of harmful effects  on performance of high-technology firms. organization science, 16: 259-274. spence, m. 1973. job market signaling. quarterly journal of economics, 87: 355-374. spence, m. 2002. signaling in retrospect and the informational structure of markets. american economic review,  92: 434-459. sturman, m. c., shao, l., & katz, j. 2012. the effect of culture on the curvilinear relationship between performance  and turnover. journal of applied psychology, 97: 46-62. syam, n. b., hess, j. d., & yang, y. 2012. sales contests versus quotas with imbalanced territories. marketing  letters, 21: 1-6. tang, r. y. 1990. the auto makers and their related party transactions in indonesia. asia pacific journal of  management, 7: 59-78. taylor, b. a., & trogdon, j. g. 2002. losing to win: tournament incentives in the national basketball association.  journal of labor economics, 20: 23-41. terwiesch, c., & ulrich, k. t. 2009. innovation tournaments: creating and selecting exceptional opportunities.  boston: harvard business school. terwiesch, c., & xu, y. 2008. innovation contests, open innovation, and multiagent problem solving. management  science, 54: 1529-1543. tosi, h. l., & greckhamer, t. 2004. culture and ceo compensation. organization science, 15: 657-670. trevor, c. o., gerhart, b., & boudreau, j. w. 1997. voluntary turnover and job performance: curvilinearity and the  moderating influences of salary growth and promotions. journal of applied psychology, 82: 44-61. twenge, j. m., campbell, s. m., hoffman, b. j., & lance, c. e. 2010. generational differences in work values:  leisure and extrinsic values increasing, social and intrinsic values decreasing. journal of management, 36:  1117-1142. vieito, j. p. t. 2011. gender, top management compensation gap, and company performance: tournament versus  behavioral theory. corporate governance: an international review, 20: 46-63. vroom, v. h. 1964. work and motivation. new york: john wiley. wade, j. b., o’reilly, c. a., & pollock, t. g. 2006. overpaid ceos and underpaid managers: fairness and execu- tive compensation. organization science, 17: 527-544. wahlgren, e. 2001. spreading the yankee way of pay. businessweek. retrieved from http://www.businessweek. com/stories/2001-04-17/spreading-the-yankee-way-of-pay weigelt, k., dukerich, j., & schotter, a. 1989. reactions to discrimination in an incentive pay compensation  scheme: a game-theoretic approach. organizational behavior and human decision processes, 44: 26-44. zabel, a., & roe, b. 2009. optimal design of pro-conservation incentives. ecological economics, 69: 126-134.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 
