

journal of management vol. 40 no. 2, february 2014 399 –421 doi: 10.1177/0149206313517265 © the author(s) 2013 reprints and permissions: sagepub.com/journalspermissions.nav  399 scarce human capital in managerial labor  markets alison mackey california polytechnic state university janice c. molloy michigan state university shad s. morris brigham young university strategic human capital scholars are increasingly recognizing the importance of human capital  scarcity for explaining individual and firm outcomes. this article focuses on scarce human  capital in the top manager labor market—and in particular, patterns in which top managers and  firms form employment relationships. this examination redirects strategic human capital schol- arship in three important ways. first, the findings point to the importance of specifying an omis- sion from prior human capital scholarship: the relationship between human capital and the firm’s  resource base (e.g., potential complementarities). second, the article illustrates the need to  simultaneously consider both human capital scarcity and complementarities, and reinforces that  scarce human capital can indeed be general human capital. finally, the theory explains how  complementarities fundamentally alter value creation and appropriation dynamics. specifically,  complementarities facilitate the matching of the best managers and firms with the most produc- tive resources, increase the size of the pie (financial proceeds) from the employment relationship,  and can enhance the manager’s bargaining power in the division of these proceeds. keywords: resource-based theory; strategic factor markets; human capital; microeconomic  analysis of panel data; cross-sectional times series design; positive assortative  matching acknowledgments: the authors would like to thank ben campbell, russ coff, tyson mackey, seminar participants  at the university of wisconsin, and participants at the strategic management society’s strategic human capital  conference at the university of utah for their helpful comments on earlier versions of this article. the constructive  critiques of associate editor tom moliterno and two anonymous reviewers are also much appreciated. corresponding author: alison mackey, management department, california polytechnic state university, 1 grand  ave., san luis obispo, ca 93407, usa.  e-mail: mackey@calpoly.edu 517265 jomxxx10.1177/0149206313517265journal of management / monthmackey et al. / scarce human capital research-articlexxxx special issue:  strategic human capital  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


400  journal of management / february 2014 strategic human capital scholarship questions deeply held assumptions about human capi- tal and its implications for firms and individuals (coff & kryscynski, 2011). most of this  work has focused on firm-specific human capital. for example, some work questions the  extent to which the firm performance benefits previously associated with firm-specific  human capital exist (e.g., campbell, coff, & kryscynski, 2012; lazear, 2009) and suggests  a continued focus on firm-specific human capital may be misplaced (e.g., ployhart &  moliterno, 2011). as a result, and consistent with resource-based logic, some scholars (campbell, coff,  et al., 2012; chadwick, 2013; kryscynski, 2013; molloy, ployhart, & barney, 2013) are turn- ing their attention to scarce and valuable human capital (hereafter, for ease of exposition,  scarce human capital), or knowledge, skills, and abilities persistently in short supply relative  to firm demand (barney, 1986; rosen, 1983). for example, psychology-based theory now  explains the conditions in which scarce human capital can emerge within a firm—even when  the individual employees themselves do not have scarce human capital (ployhart & moliterno,  2011). of course, firms can also acquire scarce human capital through labor markets (e.g.,  chadwick, 2013). one occupational group of great interest to scholars and practitioners alike is top manag- ers, or firms’ most senior executives. top managers with scarce human capital are those who  manage firms most effectively (castanias & helfat, 1991, 2001; holcomb, holmes, &  connelly, 2009). this capability might come from any number of human capital attributes,  such as a manager’s unrivaled ability to motivate employees, process complex information,  or allocate organizational resources (finkelstein, hambrick, & cannella, 2009). whatever  the specific knowledge, skills, or abilities, top managers with scarce human capital can sub- stantially influence firm performance (bertrand & schoar, 2003; mackey, 2008). despite the  importance of this scarce human capital and evidence that most firms attempt to secure this  human capital through labor markets (e.g., bonet, cappelli, & hamori, 2013), the managerial  labor market is underresearched (finkelstein et al., 2009), leaving central strategic human  capital questions unaddressed. this article addresses this void by developing and testing theory—an economic matching  model—regarding patterns in the employment relationships top managers and firms form.  the model identifies central mechanisms underlying matching—mechanisms that guide the  “right” human capital to the “right” firms and explain differences in top manager compensa- tion. to broadly foreshadow our approach and findings, we appeal to the theoretical match- ing models used in labor economics and empirically model the compensation and mobility of  over 1,000 top managers of s&p 1500 firms. the empirical model identifies managers whose  compensation is persistently different than what their human capital proxies (such as years of  education and experience) would predict. the model partitions these compensation differ- ences into portions associated with scarce human capital and firm attributes (e.g., abowd,  kramarz, perez-durate, & schmutte, 2012). our results indicate managers with scarce  human capital are more likely to form employment relationships with resource-rich firms  than other firms. on its surface, this finding may seem trivial and perhaps even obvious: the “best” manag- ers go with the firms with the “best” resources. yet to interpret the findings in this way would  be to miss a theoretical insight with substantial implications. simply put, this article points to  an omitted variable in prior human capital scholarship: the relationship between focal human   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


mackey et al. / scarce human capital  401 capital and a firm’s resources. our findings support a complementary relationship between  managerial human capital and firm resources (i.e., the combination of the resources results in  more value than what the resources can create separately). a complementary relationship  between human capital and a firm’s resources fundamentally differs from other labor markets  in which resources such as technology can substitute for scarce human capital (e.g., abowd  et al., 2012; abowd, kramarz, & margolis, 1999; m. j. andrews, gill, schank, & upward,  2008; mendes, van den berg, & lindeboom, 2010). thus our findings point to the need for  strategic human capital scholarship to specify if human capital is used as a complementary  resource, is substituted with other resources, or has no relationship with other resources. this  article redirects strategic human capital scholarship in this, and at least two other ways, a  description of which follows. second, this article extends other strategic human capital scholarship (campbell, coff, et  al., 2012; chadwick, 2013; morris, alvarez, barney, & molloy, 2013a, 2013b; ployhart &  moliterno, 2011), by demonstrating the importance of human capital scarcity for gaining  human capital advantages. this focus on scarcity differs from classic human capital work  (e.g., becker, 1964) in which human capital advantage comes from individuals being “stuck”  at a firm due to investments in firm-specific human capital. in this classic view, individuals’  firm-specific investments are most highly valued by their present employer, making it  unlikely individuals can secure lucrative offers from alternative employers and bid up their  wages with their current employer (campbell, coff, et al., 2012). this paradigm shift—from  firm-specific human capital and immobile individuals to scarce human capital and comple- mentarities with firm resources—is accomplished by shifting the unit of theory and analysis  and its theoretical framing. the framing here is individuals and firms nested within labor  markets and the unit of theory and analysis is the combination of an individual with scarce  human capital and potential complementarities with the firm’s resource base. this funda- mentally differs from extant scholarship that frames individuals within firms (rather than  labor markets) and uses aggregates of human capital (e.g., a firm’s workforce) as standalone  resources as the unit of theory and analysis. third, this article also has important implications for understanding the creation and  appropriation of value associated with scarce human capital. specifically, the theory pre- sented in this article explains how complementarities between scarce human capital and a  firm’s resource base are mechanisms that (a) underlie the matching of individuals with scarce  human capital and resource-rich firms, (b) yield a larger economic “pie” to be divided  between the firm and top manager, and (c) enhance the manager’s bargaining power, making  it so that these individuals appropriate some—but not all—of the value the complementary  resource combination yields. such a world in which human capital is scarce and complemen- tarities exist between such capital and a firm’s resource base, referred to as positive assorta- tive matching in labor economics, is now described. scarce human capital and labor market matching human capital is an individual’s embodied knowledge, skills, abilities and other charac- teristics (ksaos) that firms can put to productive use (molloy & ployhart, 2012).1 human  capital that is scarce (a) is persistently in short supply relative to demand and (b) has a use  value higher than replacement costs (campbell, coff, et al., 2012; chadwick, 2013). the   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


402  journal of management / february 2014 scarce human capital may be either general or context-specific (more applicable in some  contexts than others; morris et al., 2013a; ployhart & moliterno, 2011). scarce human capital  may also be either innate or developed, and its short supply may be either inherent or artifi- cially created. consider for example geniuses. here, the short supply comes from the distri- bution of innate intelligence across populations; simply put, there are not many geniuses. in  contrast, consider the ability to practice medicine. this human capital is developed over time  and, in some countries, policy makers cap the supply of licenses, which creates an artificial  short supply. because we are interested in developing and testing theory regarding patterns in the  employment relationships top managers and firms form, we are naturally interested in scarce  human capital that is recognized in labor markets. such human capital is generally valued  across firms; yet, as this and other recent works indicate, such human capital can still under- lie competitive advantage (chadwick, 2013; morris et al., 2013a, 2013b). in addition, indi- viduals possessing scarce human capital can be identified empirically through labor market  indicators such as wage contrasts for similarly situated individuals as, according to economic  logic, market wages reflect human capital quality (abowd et al., 1999). this empirical meth- odology developed within labor economics disaggregates compensation into components  reflecting portions due to (a) human capital that is not scarce, (b) human capital that is scarce,  and (c) firm differences (abowd et al., 2012; m. j. andrews et al., 2008; tervio, 2008). consistent with economic logic, the specific ksao(s) that are scarce are not specified in  the model because to identify a particular ksao, say high intelligence or conscientiousness,  as a source of human capital advantage would create a “rule for riches” firms would try to  follow (barney, 2001; mosakowski, 1998; rumelt, schendel, & teece, 1991). in following  the rule, the firms would bid up wages for individuals with the particular ksao to the point  that individuals possessing the human capital, and not the employing firm, would capture the  proceeds associated with the human capital (barney, 1986). in addition, human capital, just  like any resource, is context dependent and will create competitive advantage only embedded  in the right context (barney, 1991). matching theory matching theory (e.g., diamond, 1982; mortensen, 2005; pissarides, 1985) is used in  economics to understand the dynamics of search in the labor market. specifically, matching  models can predict which individuals will work at which firms, the mechanisms explaining  these matches, and why some individuals earn more than others. many features and assump- tions underlie matching models, some of which are implicit to economic logic. explaining all  the features, assumptions, and extensions of matching models in detail is beyond the scope  of this article; thus, only those aspects of matching models we appeal to in our theorizing  follow. for more detail on the features of matching models, refer to rogerson, shimer, and  wright (2005), shimer (2005), abowd et al. (2012), and other articles referenced in this  section. two assumptions are crucial to our model. first, and consistent with management’s stra- tegic factor market theory (e.g., adegbesan, 2009; barney, 1986) and recent work in labor  economics, our model assumes that both managers and firms are heterogeneous (e.g.,  mortensen & pissarides, 1999; shimer & smith, 2000). simply put, some managers possess   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


mackey et al. / scarce human capital  403 human capital that is scarcer than other managers’ human capital—and some firms have  more productive resources than other firms. the important implication of this assumption is  that of heterogeneous match potential: each possible permutation of individuals and firms  has differing competitive potential (i.e., the firm performance for firms and compensation for  managers differs with each match). second, based on prior theoretical and empirical work pertaining to top managers, scarce  managerial human capital and firm productive capital are assumed to be complements in  production (e.g., falato, li, & milbourn, 2011; gabaix & landier, 2008; tervio, 2008).  when resources that are complements in production are used together, the value-creation  potential of the resources is amplified (mankiw, 2008). simply put, a multiplicative relation- ship exists between complementary resources: they are worth more together than separate.  examples of complementary resources include hot dogs and hot dog buns, dvd players and  dvds, printers and ink cartridges, computer hardware and software, boots and shoelaces,  and pencils and erasers. managers and the firm’s resource base can be complementary  because the value of resources comes not from the resources alone (penrose, 1959) but from  manager’s decisions about how to use (i.e., combine) firm resources to formulate and imple- ment firm strategies (k. r. andrews, 1987; barney, 1986; wernerfelt, 1984). decisions about  how to combine resources are of course subjective, and a central part of the managerial task  is exploiting available discretion in these decisions (hambrick & finkelstein, 1987).  managers with scarce human capital are more capable of effectively using resources to  extract value than managers without this human capital. because individuals and firms are assumed to be heterogeneous (adegbesan, 2009;  barney, 1986), the potential complementary relationships are also heterogeneous and the  yield of the various manager–firm matches will vary. whereas human capital scarcity is  defined, in this article, relative to the availability of comparable human capital in the labor  market, complementary relationships between human capital and firm resources are defined  relative to each firm. in short, this means that managers with scarce human capital command  higher wage rates in the labor market as many firms are interested in acquiring their scarce  human capital, but that managers can also increase their pay further through bargaining with  the firm if they can create value at the firm that other managers cannot. the implications of  this heterogeneity in complementary relationships for matching and value creation—and  ultimately bargaining power and managerial pay—are now further explained. complementarities: implications for matching and value creation when resources exchanged in a factor market have a complementary relationship to the  purchaser’s resources, predictable matching patterns will emerge (cf. becker, 1973). simply  put, and as explained below, the “best” managers (i.e., those managers with the scarcest  human capital) will be employed by the “best” firms (i.e., those firms with the richest resource  base/highest potential productivity; abowd et al., 2012; mortensen, 2005). given the economic assumptions that firms want to maximize firm performance and  individuals seek to maximize their compensation, all firms will want to hire the best man- ager possible and all managers will want to work for the best firm possible because this  maximizes outcomes for firms and managers. firms with the most to gain from potential  complementarities (i.e., firms with the most productive resources) generated by the   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


404  journal of management / february 2014 combination of the scarce human capital and the firm’s resource base will be willing to pay  the most to acquire this human capital (rosen, 1990). in other words, firms with the largest  potential increase in firm performance (increase in size of the pie to be distributed) will be  willing and have the means to pay managers more than firms with less to gain. in turn,  given that managers seek to maximize compensation, these firms will have their pick of the  best managers—and the best managers will have the their pick of the firms with the best  resources. such a pattern where the best firms and managers form employment relationships is called  positive assortative matching (abowd et al., 2012; becker, 1973; sattinger, 1993; shimer,  2005; stiglitz, 1975). the complementarities between firm resources and managerial skill are  the mechanism driving this matching and have important implications for bargaining power  and managerial pay as well. complementarities: implications for bargaining power and managerial pay interestingly, complementarities not only influence the matching process and the value  created from the match but also influence the bargaining power of the manager and firm  regarding how the value associated with the manager’s human capital will be divided between  the parties (coff, 1999). consistent with morris et al. (2013a, 2013b), the examples below  illustrate how the outcome of value appropriation negotiations depends on whether comple- mentarities between managers’ human capital and the firm’s resources are uniquely valuable  (barney, 1988). suppose the complementarities between a particular firm and its top manager, mr. smith,  generate $100 million in revenue; however, the firm could replace this manager with a hand- ful of other managers who could generate similar value, say $99 million. in such a case,  mr. smith would have essentially no bargaining power because it is relatively easy for the  firm to replace him and realize essentially the same value with another manager. however, if  the complementarities between mr. smith’s human capital and the firm’s resources were  more unique, such that the firm could not easily hire another individual and enjoy the same  complementarities (and thereby the same value creation), then mr. smith would be in a much  more favorable bargaining position relative to the prior scenario. it is certainly plausible that  individuals in situations like mr. smith could appropriate enough firm value to make it  appear as though the firm does not enjoy a competitive advantage (cf. coff, 1999). however,  a pattern of positive assortative matching among managers and firms would suggest that this  is not a zero-sum game in which highly skilled individuals appropriate all of the value they  create. rather, the managers and the firms will share the gains from their match (campbell,  ganco, franco, & agarwal, 2012). complementarities above and beyond what the next best manager can generate are a man- ager’s value added (cf. brandenburger & stuart, 1996). the more value added, the higher the  manager’s bargaining power, and the more compensation the manager can walk away with.  a manager’s value added (and in turn bargaining power and compensation) is highest when  his or her skills are effectively matched to a firm’s productive resources (i.e., when the “right”  human capital finds the “right” firm). if the complementarities can be gained with many  managers, the focal manager can be relatively easily replaced, and the firm will have more  bargaining power than the manager.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


mackey et al. / scarce human capital  405 in sum, complementarities are powerful mechanisms in labor markets, especially when indi- viduals and firms are heterogeneous (adegbesan, 2009). specifically, when complementarities  exist, managers with scarce human capital (a) have opportunities to work at resource-rich firms  in which they can create more value than if they were to work at firms with fewer productive  resources, (b) can generate firm value that other managers cannot, and (c) can appropriate the  difference between their added value and what the next best managers can yield. when this  pattern of matching and outcomes emerges in labor markets, it is what labor economists call  positive assortative matching. of course, whether this type of matching and accompanying pat- tern of results occurs in the top manager labor market is an empirical question. thus, hypothesis: scarce human capital and the firm’s resource base will be positively associated, reflec- tive of complementarities, a phenomenon called positive assortative matching. method data and sample to test the hypothesis, a setting is necessary in which (a) accurate compensation data are  available over time (i.e., not subject to socially desirable responding), (b) compensation is ref- erenced to prevailing market wages, (c) detailed historical career information is readily avail- able for constructing human capital measures, and (d) adequate variation exists to disentangle  factors influencing compensation. the u.s. labor market for top managers of s&p 1500 firms  meets these conditions. first, publicly available top manager compensation information is  extracted from sec filings and corporate annual reports. because the falsification of sec fil- ings, unlike self-reports, is subject to criminal prosecution, this information is more likely to be  accurate than self-reported data. second, numerous empirical works demonstrate that top man- ager (e.g., executive and ceo) compensation contracts are anchored to prevailing market  wages (bizjak, lemmon, & naveen, 2008; bizjak, lemmon, & nguyen, 2011; ezzamel &  watson, 1998; miller, 1995; porac, wade, & pollock, 1999). third, historical career informa- tion is readily available for top managers through sources such as corporate annual reports and  private databases. finally, the sample tracks top manager mobility and compensation between  1992 and 2006, creating a web of data linking each manager with other managers who have  worked at the same companies, providing the necessary variation to test the hypothesis. specifically, the data set includes 1,123 top managers employed in 626 different firms and  spans from 1992 to 2006, for a final sample of 7,174 individual-firm-year observations.  unique identifiers are included for each manager (available from execucomp database) and  firm (available from compustat’s industrial file). these identifiers link all focal managers to  their employing firms over time—and also to other managers who have worked at these same  employers, at the same time, before, or after the focal manager. the managers and firms are  crossed rather than nested. because data in human resources–organizational behavior (hr-ob) studies are typically  nested, we clarify the difference between crossed and nested. figure 1 pertains to two indi- viduals (jones and smith) employed at three firms over time. with the crossed factors illus- trated at the top of figure 1, each individual is recognized as the “same person” as he or she  moves across the three employers. moreover, jones and smith can be linked with other  individuals who work at these same employers—even if jones and smith and those other   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


406  journal of management / february 2014 individuals did not simultaneously work at an employer. in contrast, the nesting at the bottom  of figure 1 does not allow for this tracking of individuals over time or creation of a web of  data. as illustrated, the two individuals working at three firms would statistically be treated  as six different individuals, which does not suffice for this article’s purposes. in short, because  the sample is constructed with crossed factors, the estimation can take into account informa- tion from the managers’ time at each employer in the data set and what firms paid other top  managers across time, yielding unbiased estimates of market rates for human capital and  other compensation determinants.2 measures we measure top managers’ pay with two different variables, which allows for comparing  results with different pay measures as is common in compensation studies. total cash pay is  the log of salary plus bonus; total pay is the log of the sum of salary, bonus, other annual  compensation (such as perquisites, tax reimbursements, etc.), the total value of restricted  stock grants, the total value of stock options granted using black–scholes,3 long-term incen- tive payouts, and all other total compensation (such as signing bonuses, 401k contributions,  debt forgiveness, and life insurance premiums). pay information was drawn from the  execucomp database, which summarizes compensation information in sec filings. turning to human capital proxies, prior research and compensation surveys indicate that  prior job, firm, and industry experiences are important in predicting compensation. as such,  variables in the analysis include current firm experience (employment tenure), position expe- rience (experience in current job at present employer (and if applicable, prior employers),4  and prior industry experience (time employed in present employer’s industry prior to joining  present employer). industries were categorized using the first two digits of sic codes as  figure 1 difference in crossed and nested factors crossed factors: estimation considers two individuals i in three firms j nested factors: estimation considers six individuals i in three firms j firms j 1 2 3 individuals i jones     smith jones     smith jones     smith firms j 1  2  3 individuals i jones smith   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


mackey et al. / scarce human capital  407 classified in the compustat industrial file. these variables are measured in years and, like  the education variables below, were drawn from marquis who’s who in corporate executives  database. these human capital proxies capture information about the manager’s entire pro- fessional career—not just the 1992 to 2006 time frame of the data set. given the substantial signaling value of mbas from tier 1 (top 10) or tier 2 programs  (ranked from 11 to 25) versus all other mba degrees (kingston & clawson, 1990), dummy  variables capture if managers have mbas and, if so, from which tier. tiers are based on 2006  u.s. news and world report rankings. the respective variable names are mba degree tier 1,  mba degree tier 2, and mba degree. we control for several characteristics that will likely affect compensation rates: ceo sta- tus, director status, company founder, and female status. these data come from the marquis  who’s who database. other individual and firm differences are captured in the person and  firm effects that are central to the following model explanation. model and analysis in this section, we explain the model and analysis used to test the hypothesis. the meth- odological approach used in the assortative matching literature is quite different from con- ventions within hr-ob and to some extent macro-management research. thus, the model is  explained first as it would be for economists and then made accessible to scholars who are  not economists. next we explain how the hypothesis is tested using the model. finally, the  particulars of the analysis are discussed. economic interpretation. equation 1 takes a data set such as our sample with crossed  managers and firms (factors) and regresses total pay on a set of theoretically relevant human  capital factors and controls using a two-way error components model with crossed person  and firm effects. the equation is as follows,                                           y xit y it x i i j it= + − + + + +µ µ µη θ ψ ε( )β  (1) for i = 1, . . ., n top managers, and j = 1, . . ., j firms where yit represents the logarithm  of annual compensation for top manager i in time t, µy is the grand mean of yit, xit is a vec- tor of observed (i.e., codified), time-varying top manager characteristics (i.e., firm experi- ence, position experience, prior industry experience), µx is the grand mean of xit, µi is a  vector of time-invariant observed top manager characteristics and controls (i.e., mba  degree tier 1, mba degree tier 2, mba degree, ceo status, director status, company  founder, and gender), θi is a random effect parameter capturing persistent unidentified top  manager characteristics, and ψj is a random effect parameter capturing firm effects on  compensation and is often interpreted as a proxy for underlying differences in the  resources of the firm.5 multidisciplinary interpretation. the essential logic behind equation 1 is that pay is a  function of who you are (human capital) and where you work (employer characteristics), as  represented in equation 2.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


408  journal of management / february 2014                             compensation f who you are where you work        = ( ),  (2) consistent with the economic tradition, who you are is assessed with an array of human  capital proxies, such as years of education and job experience. the purpose of the proxies is  to capture the individual’s background; the proxies are not precise measures of one’s actual  knowledge, skills, or abilities. relevant human capital proxies for this study are industry,  company, functional experience, whether the person has an mba and, if so, from what tier,  and so forth. more recent labor economic compensation models recognize that human capital proxies  do not capture all critical variation in human capital. a person effect is included in the estima- tion to capture persistent differences among individuals that are not captured in the human  capital proxies (cf. abowd et al., 1999). labor economists interpret the person effect as iden- tifying highly skilled individuals with attributes that are valuable (i.e., in high demand) and  are not commonly held by individuals in that particular labor market. thus, as indicated in  equation 3, “who you are” is captured with an array of human capital proxies and a person  effect.                            who you are f human capital proxies person effect         = ( ),  (3) simply put, who you are captures both the human capital that is not scarce and that which  is scarce as referenced in the theory section. the human capital proxies are used to estimate  compensation associated with human capital that is not scarce. the person effect is used to  estimate compensation associated with human capital that is scarce. simply stated, those  managers for whom the model identifies scarce human capital premiums command higher  pay in the labor market than their peers with similar education and experience. of course,  only some individuals in a labor market have scarce human capital and earn an associated  compensation premium.6 this premium “travels with” managers as they move among firms,  suggesting these managers bring productivity gains to firms beyond that of colleagues with  similar human capital proxies. it is assumed that this premium, because it persists over time  and across firms, is not an error; in the economic view, market-based premiums like the posi- tive person effect persist only for those who can command it, as underperforming managers  face ex post settling up in future compensation contracts (fama, 1980). more recent labor economic compensation models also recognize the role of employer  characteristics in explaining compensation variation. thus, the model includes a firm effect  to capture such between-firm differences in how firms compensate managers (equation 4).  the firm effect identifies cross-sectional differences in firms’ preferences—and willingness  to pay “above market”—for managerial capital and is often viewed as a proxy for underlying  differences in the resources of the firm (abowd et al., 1999). this premium is particular to an  employing firm and therefore does not “travel” with the manager.                                            where you work f firm effect      = ( )  (4) taken together, the logic behind equation 1 is that compensation is a function of who you  are (human capital proxies, person effect) and where you work (firm effect), as shown in  equation 5.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


mackey et al. / scarce human capital  409                    compensation f human capital proxies person effect firm       = , ,  effect( )  (5) importantly, the person effect and firm effect represent two separate adjustments to the  expected compensation a manager earns. thus, if a manager with scarce human capital (posi- tive person effect) works at a firm that pays more than other firms (positive firm effect), this  manager essentially earns two premiums above what his or her human capital proxies would  predict, one premium for the manager’s scarce human capital and the other for where he or  she works. to avoid potential confusion, we clarify that the components the model empiri- cally disaggregates are not aligned with compensation elements hr-ob scholars and practi- tioners might examine in salary surveys, such as base pay, bonuses, or stock grants, for  example. the test. consistent with the labor economics literature, the hypothesis is tested by  examining the correlation between the person and firm effects. a positive and significant  correlation indicates that individuals with scarce human capital are matching with firms  with rich resource bases, or, in other words, positive assortative matching is occurring.  thus a positive, significant correlation between the person and firm effects supports that  complementarities (a) underlie the matching of individuals with scarce human capital and  resource-rich firms, (b) yield more economic proceeds to be divided between the firm and  top manager, and (c) enhance the manager’s bargaining power in appropriating some, but  not all, of these proceeds. analysis. the person and firm effects are estimated with random effect assumptions and  all other variables with fixed effect assumptions.7 this simultaneous modeling of random  and fixed effects has been made possible by innovations in panel data methodology referred  to as mixed effects or a two-way error component model with cross random effects (cf. rabe- hesketh & skrondal, 2005). mixed effect approaches do not require assuming that the ran- dom effect parameters are uncorrelated with the explanatory variables (abowd, creecy, &  mckinney, 2005), which is important as person and firm effects are likely correlated with the  regression coefficients. the following results were modeled using the xtmixed command in  stata version 10. results descriptive statistics for the variables included in equation 1 are presented in table 1. results from the estimation of equation 1 are presented in table 2. model 1 uses total pay  as the dependent variable, and model 2 cash pay. results for both models are comparable,  suggesting the findings are consistent between measures of compensation. results are also  consistent with theories of human capital (becker, 1964). for example, as expected, top man- agers with more nonscarce general human capital, such as education and experience, earn  higher compensation than do managers with less. to test the hypothesis, the relevant statistics are the correlations between the person and  firm effects, which are listed in table 2 beneath the effects’ standard deviations.8 the results   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


410  journal of management / february 2014 table 2 two-way error components estimates of wage equation model 1, dv: total pay model 2, dv: cash pay  estimate (se) estimate (se) firm experience (yrs) 0.031*** (0.002) 0.012*** (0.002) prior industry experience (yrs) 0.027*** (0.005) 0.011*** (0.003) position tenure (yrs) 0.008*** (0.003) 0.006*** (0.002) education (mba degree) –0.006 (0.083) –0.115** (0.059) education (mba degree from tier 1  school) 0.081 (0.105) 0.122 (0.075) education (mba degree from tier 2  school) –0.214 (0.164) 0.062 (0.118) ceo status 0.472*** (0.034) 0.287*** (0.031) director status 0.515*** (0.036) 0.243*** (0.031) company founder status –0.379*** (0.109) –0.110 (0.090) female status –0.328*** (0.103) –0.123* (0.074) random effect parameters (estimates of sd)  person effect 0.55 0.35  firm effect 0.89 0.53 correlation (person, firm effects) .39*** .43*** observations 7,174 7,174 number of top managers 1,123 1,123 number of firms 626 626 restricted log likelihood –9,283 –8,597 *p < .1. **p < .01. ***p < .001. table 1 descriptive statistics m sd 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1. total compensation (ln) 14.30 1.16 1.00   2. total cash compensation (ln) 13.53 0.96 .64 1.00   3. firm experience (yrs) 14.65 11.79 .04 .10 1.00   4. prior industry experience (yrs) 2.05 5.47 .07 .05 –.19 1.00   5. position experience (yrs) 8.84 8.24 .07 .09 .50 –.01 1.00   6. ceo status 0.28 0.45 .32 .24 .18 .09 .29 1.00   7. director status 0.45 0.50 .31 .24 .29 .05 .34 .62 1.00   8. company founder status 0.03 0.18 .03 .02 .12 –.04 .22 .14 .16 1.00   9. female status 0.05 0.22 –.06 –.05 –.06 –.03 –.05 –.06 –.12 –.03 1.00   10. education (mba degree) 0.24 0.43 .09 .06 –.05 .06 –.08 .00 –.05 –.09 –.02 1.00   11. education (mba degree tier 1) 0.12 0.32 .09 .08 –.03 .07 –.02 .03 .01 –.05 –.02 .65 1.00   12. education (mba degree tier 2) 0.03 0.16 .03 .05 .01 .00 –.02 .01 –.02 –.03 –.04 .30 –.06 1.00  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


mackey et al. / scarce human capital  411 confirm the hypothesis—the correlations between these two effects are positive and statisti- cally significant (r = .39 and r = .43 for models 1 and 2, respectively; p < .001). these cor- relations are consistent with a medium effect size (correlation ranging between .30 and .49  using cohen’s, 1988, standards). this means that the compensation attributed to person  effects and firm effects is positively associated; managers with more human capital tend to  “go with” firms with more resources. thus, the data support the hypothesis that this manage- rial labor market is characterized by positive assortative matching. simply put, the positive, significant correlation between the person and firm effects  suggests that managers with scarce human capital (indicated by the person effect) are  employed by firms with the most productive resources (indicated by the firm effect). based  on economic theory, this matching of individuals with scarce human capital and resource- rich firms is driven by the complementarities between the manager and the firm. these  complementarities also create a larger economic “pie” to be divided between the firm and  top manager. these managers with scarce human capital earn higher compensation than  their peers without this scarce human capital because the market rewards such capital (the  positive person effect compensation premium) but also because the complementarities  with the firm enhance their bargaining power such that they earn a second premium (the  positive firm effect compensation premium). this is not a zero-sum game, however, as  these managers appropriate some—but not all—of the value the complementary combina- tion yields. of course, the correlation merely reports a tendency; certainly cases exist in which man- agers with scarce human capital are not employed by highly productive firms. the prepon- derance of the evidence, however, suggests that matches between managers with scarce  human capital and firms with more productive resources occur more often than not. these findings must be interpreted relative to the empirical literature and alternative  explanations. empirical work within labor economics does not find strong support for  positive assortative matching (abowd et al., 2012). some work demonstrates a small nega- tive correlation between person and firm effects (e.g., abowd et al., 1999), while other  work shows evidence of a positive correlation (e.g., abowd, lengermann, & mckinney,  2003; iranzo, schivardi, & tosetti, 2008; woodcock, 2008). however, most empirical  work within labor economics testing these predictions analyzes data sets of workers in  broad labor markets, such as a country’s full labor market. there is some reason to expect  those labor markets to exhibit different matching patterns from the managerial labor mar- ket. recent work suggests that positive assortative matching may be concentrated at the  higher end of the distribution of the labor market (i.e., skilled occupations commanding top  salaries; bagger, vejlin, & sørensen, 2012) and in the ceo labor market in particular  (tervio, 2008). discussion this article examined scarce human capital and complementarities with firm resources.  we found support for complementarities in the top manager labor market (a) acting as mech- anisms facilitating matches between individuals with scarce human capital and resource-rich  firms, (b) increasing the economic proceeds to be divided between the firm and top manager,  and (c) enhancing managers’ bargaining power/ability to appropriate the value associated   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


412  journal of management / february 2014 with their human capital. in this section, we outline the contributions this article makes,  opportunities for future research, and the limitations of this study. contributions this article makes many contributions. for convenience, the following contributions are  grouped into those that (a) respond to calls for strategic human capital scholarship and para- digm shifts, (b) are applicable to all human capital scholarship, and (c) pertain to managerial  compensation scholarship. broadly, this article addresses several calls to redirect strategic human capital scholarship.  first, the article responds to calls to incorporate logic and methods of labor economics to  offer a different perspective of human capital advantages (molloy & ployhart, 2012). second,  the article contextualizes human capital in its labor market context, which has been relatively  overlooked in respect to organizational perspectives (campbell, coff, et al., 2012; molloy et  al., 2013). finally, the article sheds much-needed light on mechanisms linking human capi- tal, value creation, and value capture (coff, 2012). these contributions position this article to  complement ployhart and moliterno’s (2011) theory regarding scarce human capital within  organizations. whereas ployhart and moliterno’s focus is scarce human capital developing  (emerging) from an individual’s human capital within organizations through hr-ob mecha- nisms, this article’s focus is scarce human capital that is acquired by firms in labor markets.  together, this article and that of ployhart and moliterno provide important theoretical direc- tion for strategic human capital scholarship. the article also explicates important steps scholars can take to advance human capital  scholarship. first, scholars need to specify a previously omitted variable: the relationship  between human capital and the firm’s resource base (which could be complements, substi- tutes, or unrelated). second, and along related lines, scholars examining scarce human  capital need to simultaneously examine the implications of scarcity and complementarities  with firm resources. and as other scholars have suggested (morris et al., 2013a, 2013b),  the theory and findings of this article give credence to the idea that general human capital  of an individual can indeed be scarce. finally, scholars need to apply this article to examine  how complementarities fundamentally alter value creation and appropriation dynamics  (e.g., increasing the financial proceeds for managers and firms to divide, enhancing the  manager’s bargaining power in compensation negotiations, etc.; cf. morris et al., 2013a,  2013b). this article also makes important contributions to scholarship on managerial compensa- tion. to date, a link between human capital and executive compensation has eluded scholars.  finkelstein et al. (2009) explain, the work on human capital [to explain executive compensation] has not yet produced a robust  set of results. while it may be that certain human capital is advantageous in reaching the top  echelons of a firm or in being selected as an outsider to run a company, theory has been . . .less  clear on how this translates more directly into higher pay. in some ways, this is surprising,  because at an intuitive level it is perfectly evident that some executives are paid more than others  in part due to differences in skill sets. the problem may be the occasional disconnect between  the primary research idea being investigated and the relative lack of sophistication in effectively  testing that idea. (pp. 307-308)  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


mackey et al. / scarce human capital  413 specifically, this article fulfills calls (devers, cannella, reilly, & yoder, 2007; finkelstein  et al., 2009) to theoretically link human capital, executive pay, and other relevant labor mar- ket influences. moreover, the article demonstrates the productivity interconnectedness of  individuals and firms, which has implications for assessing the marginal product of managers  (tervio, 2008). the approach we use can also be applied to other labor markets to link human  capital and compensation. like the prior contributions, this contribution points to important  future research. future research the article opens many important opportunities for theoretical and empirical scholarship  on topics as far ranging as scholarship about complements, substitutes, value appropriation,  outliers, industry differences, and diverse (or underrepresented) groups. complements, substitutes, and value appropriation. a promising and important theo- retical need is articulating the value creation and appropriation implications of various  types of relationships between forms of capital. for example, in the complementary rela- tionships between human capital and the firm’s productive capital in this article, the value  of the human capital is amplified and the managers are in a better position to appropriate  value because of the complementarities. future research could explore important boundary  conditions for when human capital is a complement to other forms of capital. in addition,  theory is needed for when human capital is a substitute for firm productive capital and  what the value appropriation implications are of these scenarios. in some situations substi- tution will lower bargaining power (e.g., when technology deskills remaining jobs), but in  other situations it could potentially raise it, as when technology increases the skills that  remaining jobs require (such as when mechanization creates the need for statistical process  control skills). of course, another important opportunity is examining other labor markets, be they geo- graphical or occupational markets, for evidence of positive assortative matching. scholars  have anticipated positive assortative matching in other markets, but to date strong evidence  has eluded scholars (e.g., abowd et al., 2012; m. j. andrews et al., 2008; gruetter & lalive,  2004; sørensen & vejlin, 2012). along related lines, an important area for research is whether potential complementari- ties are actually realized. this work could assess if some complementarities are easier to  realize than others, and if meaningful distinctions exist, create a typology of realization  categories to guide future research. an interesting consideration here is whether the ease of  realization varies with the prevalence of the human capital. for example, it could be that  complementarities involving human capital that is not scarce are easier to realize than  complementarities involving scarce human capital. then, scholars can define and test con- ditions in which complementarities are most likely to be realized. of course, if scholars  find a typology of realization categories is warranted, such conditions may vary by cate- gory. scholarship on realization of complementarities not only is interesting and important  from a theoretical perspective but also can make managerial prescriptions regarding human  capital that are more useful.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


414  journal of management / february 2014 outliers. theorizing and further empirical work on the outliers in this and related studies  could yield important insights into human-capital-based advantages. for example, although  we find that overall the managerial labor market can be characterized by positive assortative  matching, this is of course a general tendency. certainly cases exist in which managers with  scarce human capital are not employed in highly productive firms in which they share com- plementarities. thus, examination of “outliers” could be fruitful for further understanding of  managing scarce human capital, specifically understanding what attracts some managers  with scarce human capital to firms that are not highly productive. as emerging theory sug- gests, do these firms offer nonpecuniary benefits that these managers value more than tradi- tional compensation (cf. kryscynski, 2013), or are there noncompensation preferences that  are driving these employment decisions, such as family obligations that impose geographic  restrictions? likewise, when highly productive firms hire managers without scarce human  capital, is this an intentional choice for certain positions less critical to a firm’s strategy?  these situations may be reflective of a substitution relationship between human capital and  firm productive resources. industry differences. similarly, future work could construct hypotheses regarding  between-industry differences in the person and firm effect correlations. some industries, or  some positions within some industries, are likely to not require or reward managers with  scarce human capital. this could be the case if top managerial positions in some industries  require less executive discretion than others. thus, this work on labor market matching could  lead to identification of important boundary conditions about the feasibility of human-capi- tal-based advantages. it may be that some assumptions about human capital advantage need  to be rethought. of course, competitive advantages based on other firm resources are possi- ble even when human-capital-based advantages are not. even if prevailing theory still stands,  explication of boundary conditions is an important contribution to strategic management and  hr-ob scholarship. diversity. as firms seek to increase the participation of groups previously underrepre- sented among top managers, such as females and racial minorities, an important area of  research is if membership in an underrepresented group has compensation implications—and  if members of underrepresented groups have equal opportunities to work at highly produc- tive firms. historically, economists have found that racial minorities, for example, are under- paid relative to their peers. does this continue to be the case in the top manager market? or  does the increased demand for the short supply of underrepresented top managers have the  opposite effect and lead to members of underrepresented groups earning more than other  managers? a preliminary finding from this study, consistent with other work (e.g., blau & kahn,  2000) is that compensation differences between males and females are statistically signifi- cant, with men earning more than women. our approach extends prior work by allowing  decomposition of the wage gap into portions associated with human capital and employers.  the preliminary analyses for the top manager labor market (see table 3) show that men  appear to have more commonly held human capital (e.g., education and experience) than  their female counterparts, which results in a wage gap. two factors reducing this gap are the   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


mackey et al. / scarce human capital  415 increased likelihood that women have scarce human capital (i.e., higher average person  effects) and work for more productive firms (i.e., have higher average firm effects) than do  men. sample sizes of female top managers are obviously small, and statistical inference from  the techniques used in this article should be cautiously interpreted. these results are prelimi- nary and require more systematic study but do point to provocative and important research  for any labor market studied by strategic human capital scholars. limitations like all studies, this study has limitations, which also present research opportunities. for  example, since our sample includes individuals who are heavily incentivized (compared to  nonmanagerial employees), it is possible that the person effect could include some manage- rial skill plus some “effort.” if so this may cause some difficulty with the interpretation of  the person effect. labor economists view effort as adjustable capital whereas they view  managerial skill/ability as fixed capital. typically, matching models define the surplus of  the match net of the cost of all adjustable inputs. however, in the case of effort, this is a type  of adjustable capital that is embedded in the individual managers and therefore may become  a confounding factor in the estimation. that said, the extant literature suggests that the  variation in the effort exerted by top managers is minimal and does not substantially affect  the interpretation of the person effect (cf. tervio, 2008). however, a unique feature of  human capital is that as an embodied resource, its ownership and use cannot be separated  (chadwick, 2013). this differs from other resources such as, for example, a machine or  technology, for which the owner decides how it is deployed. simply put, these other  resources cannot regulate or withhold their effort. examining this issue is an important area  for theory development that will have meaningful implications not only for studies such as  this on top managers, but also for all research examining relationships between human capi- tal and performance. some scholars have begun to address this issue (molloy & cooper,  2012), but more intensive examination is required. another possible limitation concerns other mechanisms that potentially drive the  positive correlation between person and firm effects. for example, firms in an extremely  competitive environment that need to be highly productive may opt to pay efficiency  table 3 determinants of male and female top manager total pay raw compensation  gap average human  capital proxies average firm  effect average  person effect  observations (sd) (sd) (sd) (sd) male top managers 4,886 –0.22 0.08 –0.21 –0.06  (1.08) (0.50) (0.66) (0.34) female top managers 296 –0.42 –0.48 0.06 0.00  (1.15) (0.29) (0.58) (0.30) male–female difference 0.20*** 0.56*** –0.27*** –0.06*** ***p < .001.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


416  journal of management / february 2014 wages to attract highly skilled managers and/or curb monitoring costs. such firms may  be those in a technology race with substantial gains for being the first to market (i.e., first  mover advantage). if the sample comprises many such firms, this could also lead to our  findings of positive assortative matching. in a different vein, a dutch study shows that  the correlation is not stationary over time and appears to be driven by voluntary move- ment from the most skilled workers moving from one highly productive firm to another  (bagger et al., 2012). frequent movement between firms could certainly be occurring  within the top manager labor market. future research that examines this in more detail  and explores the moderating factors of this change in the correlation over time would be  valuable. last, it is possible that the correlation between person and firm effects could be a statisti- cal artifact resulting from a scenario in which it is difficult to disentangle person and firm  effects. however, we do not anticipate this as a problem in the current data, as the connectiv- ity between the managers and firms creates sufficient mobility to disentangle person and firm  effects. clearly, with more and better data (i.e., more mobility in the sample), the model  could yield even more accurate results. conclusion human capital scholarship in management is undergoing nothing short of a renaissance,  challenging scholars and managers alike to rethink “what we know” about human capital and  competitive advantage. this article contributes to this scholarship by examining which top  managers and firms form employment relationships and what compensation is paid. our  findings open important avenues for research and practice. indeed, it is our hope that this  article, along with other emerging strategic human capital scholarship, shifts research from  an almost exclusive focus on firm specificity to a focus on scarcity and facilitates cross- and  multidisciplinary research. such scholarship is necessary to understand the complexities  underlying individuals’ career mobility and relationships between human capital and firm  performance. appendix overview of panel data and two-way error components models with  crossed random effects the empirical methodology of this article relies on sampling and estimation techniques  less common in the human resources–organizational behavior (hr-ob) literature. given that  strategic human capital scholarship spans both strategic management and hr-ob, it is  important for the empirical work to be accessible to both sets of scholars. the “data and sample” section of the article references an unbalanced panel data set. the  data set includes 1,123 top managers—including 401 ceos—employed in 626 different  firms and spans from 1992 to 2006. since a manager is observed in multiple years, and in  some instances in multiple firms, but not every year in the data set (an “unbalanced” panel),  the final sample is 7,174 individual-firm-year observations. statisticians and econometrics use the term “panel” to refer to data that are both cross- sectional and times series. panel data have the general form of χit i n t t, ,... , ,...= =1 1 , where   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


mackey et al. / scarce human capital  417 i is the individual (cross-sectional) dimension and t is the time dimension. simply stated,  data for each top manager in the sample are recorded in a separate row for each year the  manager is in the data set. for each available year of the data set (1992-2006), a row con- tains the manager’s annual compensation (taken from compustat’s execucomp database)  and human capital (taken from marquis who’s who in corporate executives biographical  file) data—and identifiers for the employing firm and industry (taken from compustat’s  industrial file). one substantial benefit of this type of data construction is the rich variations captured. for  example, a top manager may have made different investments in human capital as of 2006  than earlier in his or her career (say, the first year of our sampling period, 1992, before the  manager earned an mba in 1996). moreover, top managers will likely earn different com- pensation in different years; all of these changes are captured. it is also critical to note that  the human capital data (taken from marquis who’s who in corporate executives biographi- cal file) actually capture a top manager’s entire professional career—even prior to 1992 when  the compensation data begins. thus, for a given top manager in the data set in 1992, the  compensation data for that row of the panel will represent compensation earned in 1992 but  the human capital data will represent human capital investments from the beginning of his or  her career up to 1992. in both the “measures” and the “model and analysis” sections, reference is made to  fixed and random effects in the modeling. some confusion has been noted about the use of  these terms between econometrics and psychometrics (cf. molloy, ployhart, & wright,  2011). modeling data with fixed effects assumptions means that a given variable is assumed  to have the same effect on the dependent variable, common across all observations (in this  case, individuals and firms). in other words, if prior industry experience is modeled with  fixed effects assumptions, then it is assumed that prior industry experience affects the  dependent variable (i.e., compensation) in the same way for every individual in the data  set—thus, one coefficient for the relationship between prior industry experience and com- pensation is sufficient for the entire sample (i.e., the regression coefficient is the same for  each person). in contrast, modeling data with random effects assumptions means that a  given variable is assumed to have a different effect on the dependent variable for each indi- vidual in the sample. in other words, it is assumed that there is a distribution of effects  instead of one coefficient. so using the prior example about the relationship between prior  industry experience and compensation, this variable, if modeled with random effects  assumptions, would be presumed to have a different effect for every individual in the data  set; thus the entire distribution of effects would be estimated (instead of one coefficient for  the entire data set). as noted in the article, the person and firm effects are estimated with random effect  assumptions and all other variables with fixed effect assumptions using the technique of  mixed effects, or two-way error components modeling with crossed random effects. as indi- cated in figure 1, the crossed random effects are the person and firm effects. their crossing  allows the estimation procedure to “track” individuals as they move across firms, which is  vital for decomposing compensation into its human capital and employer determinants. this  decomposition would not be possible using nested effects, because as indicated in figure 1,  when individuals move between firms, the estimation procedure would consider the indi- viduals as different subjects.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


418  journal of management / february 2014 notes 1. for ease of exposition, the terms human capital and skills are used interchangeably in the rest of this article  and the term scarce human capital refers to scarce and valuable human capital. 2. crossed factors are particularly important for empirical estimations of managerial labor market dynamics  because the sample naturally incorporates compensation information about industry peers and any “settling up”  occurring for the manager (cf. fama, 1980; spence, 2002; wowak, hambrick, & henderson, 2011). this is consis- tent with research suggesting that, at least to some degree, top manager pay is influenced by industry peer groups  (e.g., bizjak, lemmon, & naveen, 2008; bizjak, lemmon, & nguyen, 2011; porac, wade, & pollock, 1999) and  that managers with poor track records suffer diminished employment prospects, receive lower pay, and hold lower  positions (cannella, fraser, &, lee, 1995; gilson, 1989; semadeni, cannella, fraser, & lee, 2008). 3. compensation is calculated for option grants instead of exercised options because the timing for exercising  options is arbitrarily determined by the executive whereas the timing of option grants is determined contractually  between the executive and the firm. 4. for example, if an individual were a ceo of a prior and his or her current employer, all of this time in the ceo  position would be included in the position experience variable. 5. as shown in equation 1, variables are centered at their means prior to the estimation. centering variables in  this manner allows for interpretation of the effect on expected compensation when the other explanatory variables  are set to their means, instead of zero. this approach eases interpretation as it allows relative comparisons to be  made. 6. labor economists use the term high-wage worker for these individuals. 7. see the appendix for additional information about modeling with fixed and random effect assumptions. 8. the estimates of the person and firm effect parameters are not reported in table 2 since these effects are esti- mated for every individual and firm in the sample. references abowd, j. m., creecy, r., & mckinney, k. 2005. who you are versus where you work: using a mixed-effects model  to decompose wages. working paper, cornell university school of industrial and labor relations. abowd, j. m., kramarz, f., & margolis, d. 1999. high wage workers and high-wage firms. econometrica, 67:  251-333. abowd, j. m., kramarz, f., perez-durate, s., & schmutte, i. m. 2012. a formal test of assortative matching in labor  markets. working paper, cornell university school of industrial and labor relations. abowd, j. m., lengermann, p., & mckinney, k. l. 2003. the measurement of human capital in the u.s. economy.  technical report no. tp-2002-09, lehd, u.s. census bureau, washington, dc. adegbesan, j. a. 2009. on the origins of competitive advantage: strategic factor markets and heterogeneous  resource complementarity. academy of management review, 34: 463-475. andrews, k. r. 1987. the concept of corporate strategy (3rd ed.). homewood, il: irwin. andrews, m. j., gill, l., schank, t., & upward, r. 2008. high wage workers and low wage firms: negative assorta- tive matching or limited mobility bias? journal of the royal statistical society: series a (statistics in society),  171: 673-697. bagger, j., vejlin, r., & sørensen, k. l. 2012. wage sorting trends. ftp://ftp.econ.au.dk/afn/wp/12/wp12_17.pdf. barney, j. b. 1986. strategic factor markets: expectations, luck and business strategy. management science, 32:  1231-1241. barney, j. b. 1988. returns to bidding firms in mergers and acquisitions: reconsidering the relatedness hypothesis.  strategic management journal, 9(s1):71-78. barney, j. b. 1991. firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. journal of management, 17: 99-120. barney, j. b. 2001. resource-based theories of competitive advantage: a ten-year retrospective on the resource- based view. journal of management, 27: 643-650. becker, g. s. 1964. human capital: a theoretical and empirical analysis, with special reference to education.  chicago: university of chicago press. becker, g. s. 1973. a theory of marriage: part 1. journal of political economy, 81: 813-846. bertrand, m., & schoar, a. 2003. managing with style: the effect of managers on firm policies. quarterly journal  of economics, 118: 1169-208.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


mackey et al. / scarce human capital  419 bizjak, j., lemmon, m., & naveen, l. 2008. does the use of peer groups contribute to higher pay and less efficient  compensation? journal of financial economics, 90: 158-168. bizjak, j., lemmon, m., & nguyen, t. 2011. are all ceos above average? an empirical analysis of compensation  peer groups and pay design. journal of financial economics, 100: 538-555. blau, f., & kahn, l. 2000. gender differences in pay. working paper no. 7732, national bureau of economic  research, cambridge, ma. bonet, r., cappelli, p., & hamori, m. 2013. labor market intermediaries and the new paradigm for human resources.  academy of management annals, 7: 339-390. brandenburger, a. m., & stuart, h. w. 1996. value-based business strategy. journal of economics & management  strategy, 5: 5-24. campbell, b., coff, r., & kryscynski, d. 2012. re-thinking competitive advantage from human capital: how the  concept of firm-specificity has led strategy theorists astray. academy of management review, 37: 376-395. campbell, b. a., ganco, m., franco, a. m., & agarwal, r. 2012. who leaves, where to, and why worry? employee  mobility, entrepreneurship and effects on source firm performance. strategic management journal, 33: 65-87. cannella, a. a., fraser, d. r., & lee, d. s. 1995. firm failure and managerial labor markets: evidence from texas  banking. journal of financial economics, 38: 185-210. castanias, r. p., & helfat, c. e. 1991. managerial resources and rents. journal of management, 17: 155-171. castanias, r. p., & helfat, c. e. 2001. the managerial rents model: theory and empirical analysis. journal of  management, 27: 661-678. chadwick, c. 2013. beyond firm-specific human capital: labor market imperfections, human capital scarcity, and  the competitive advantage of firms. working paper, university of kansas, lawrence. coff, r. w. 1999. when competitive advantage doesn’t lead to performance: the resource-based view and stake- holder bargaining power. organization science, 10: 119-133. coff, r. w. 2012. strategic human capital paradoxes. strategic human capital interest group fall newsletter, 3:  9-10. coff, r. w., & kryscynski, d. 2011. drilling for micro-foundations of human capital-based advantages. journal of  management, 37: 1299-1315. cohen, j. 1988. statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). hillsdale, nj: lawrence erlbaum. devers, c. e., cannella, a. a., reilly, g. p., & yoder, m. e. 2007. executive compensation: a multidisciplinary  review of recent developments. journal of management, 33: 1016-1072. diamond, p. a. 1982. aggregate demand management in search equilibrium. journal of political economy, 90:  881-94. ezzamel, m., & watson, r. 1998. market comparison earnings and the bidding-up of executive cash compensation:  evidence from the united kingdom. academy of management journal, 41: 221-231. falato, a., li, d., & milbourn, t. 2011. to each according to his ability? ceo pay and the market for ceos.  working paper, washington university in st. louis. fama, e. g. 1980. agency problems and the theory of the firm. journal of political economy, 88: 280-307. finkelstein, s., hambrick, d. c., & cannella, a. 2009. strategic leadership: theory and research on executives, top  management teams, and boards. oxford, uk: oxford university press. gabaix, x., & landier, a. 2008. why has ceo pay increased so much? quarterly journal of economics, 123:  49-100. gilson, s. c. 1989. management turnover and financial distress. journal of financial economics, 25: 241-262. gruetter, m., & lalive, r. 2004. job mobility and industry wage differentials evidence from matched employer  employee data. royal economic society annual conference paper no. 140, royal economic society, st.  andrews, uk. hambrick, d. c., & finkelstein, s. 1987. managerial discretion: a bridge between polar views of organizational  outcomes. research in organizational behavior, 9: 369-406. holcomb, t. r., holmes, r. m., & connelly, b. 2009. making the most of what you’ve got: managerial ability as a  source of resource value creation. strategic management journal, 30: 457-485. iranzo, s., schivardi, f., & tosetti, e. 2008. skill dispersion and firm productivity: an analysis with matched  employer-employee data. journal of labor economics, 26: 247-285. kingston, p. w., & clawson, j. g. 1990. getting on the fast track: recruitment at an elite business school. in p. w.  kingston & l. s. lewis (eds.), high status track: studies of elite schools and stratification: 231-254. albany:  state university of new york press.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


420  journal of management / february 2014 kryscynski, d. 2013. the other side of the coin: firm-specific inducements and human capital-based competitive  advantages. working paper, marriott school of business, brigham young university, provo, ut. lazear, e. p. 2009. firm-specific human capital: a skill-weights approach. journal of political economy, 117:  914-940. mackey, a. 2008. the effect of ceos on firm performance. strategic management journal, 29: 1357-1367. mankiw, g. 2008. principles of economics. mason, oh: cengage learning. mendes, r., van den berg, g. j., & lindeboom, m. 2010. an empirical assessment of assortative matching in the  labor market. labour economics, 17: 919-929. miller, d. j. 1995. ceo salary increases may be rational after all: referents and contracts in ceo pay. academy of  management journal, 38: 1361-1385. molloy, j. c., & cooper, j. t. 2012. interactions between human capital, motivation, and commitment. presentation  at the strategic management society special conference on strategic human capital, columbus, oh. molloy, j. c., & ployhart, r. e. 2012. construct clarity: multidisciplinary considerations and an illustration using  human capital. human resource management review, 22: 152-156. molloy, j. c., ployhart, r. e., & barney, j. b. 2013. a theory of general human capital and firm performance.  working paper, university of bath, bath, uk. molloy, j. c., ployhart, r. e., & wright, p. m. 2011. the myth of “the” micro-macro divide: bridging disciplinary  and system-level divides. journal of management, 37: 581-609. morris, s., alvarez, s., barney, j., & molloy, j. 2013a. dancing with the stars: dynamic value appropriation and  pareto-optimal contracting. working paper, marriott school of business, brigham young university, provo,  ut. morris, s., alvarez, s., barney, j., & molloy, j. 2013b. firm-specific human capital as a signal of general value:  revisiting assumptions about human capital and how it is managed. working paper, marriott school of  business, brigham young university, provo, ut. mortensen, d. t. 2005. wage dispersion: why are similar workers paid differently? cambridge, ma: mit press. mortensen, d. t., & pissarides, c. a. 1999. new developments in models of search in the labor market. in o.  ashenfelter & d. card (eds.), handbook of labor economics (1st ed.), vol. 3: 2567-2627. amsterdam: elsevier. mosakowski, e. 1998. managerial prescriptions under the resource-based view of strategy: the example of motiva- tional techniques. strategic management journal, 19: 1169-1182. penrose, e. 1959. the theory of the growth of the firm. new york: john wiley. pissarides, c. a. 1985. short-run equilibrium dynamics of unemployment vacancies and real wages. american  economic review, 75: 676-690. ployhart, r. e., & moliterno, t. p. 2011. emergence of the human capital resource: a multilevel model. academy  of management review, 36: 127-150. porac, j. f., wade, j. b., & pollock, t. g. 1999. industry categories and the politics of the comparable firm in ceo  compensation. administrative science quarterly, 44: 112-144. rabe-hesketh, s., & skrondal, a. 2005. multilevel and longitudinal modeling using stata. college station, tx:  stata press. rogerson, r., shimer, r., & wright, r. 2005. search-theoretic models of the labor market: a survey. journal of  economic literature, 43: 959-988. rosen, s. 1983. specialization and human capital. journal of labor economics, 1: 43-49. rosen, s. 1990. contracts and the market for executives. working paper no. 3542, national bureau of economic  research, cambridge, ma. rumelt, r. p., schendel, d., & teece, d. j. 1991. strategic management and economics. strategic management  journal, 12(s2): 5-29. sattinger, m. 1993. assignment models of the distribution of earnings. journal of economic literature, 31: 831- 880. semadeni, m., cannella, a. a., fraser, d. r., & lee, d. s. 2008. fight or flight: managing stigma in executive  careers. strategic management journal, 29: 555-567. shimer, r. 2005. the assignment of workers to jobs in an economy with coordination frictions. journal of political  economy, 113: 996-1025. shimer, r., & smith, l. 2000. assortative matching and search. econometrica, 68: 343-370. sørensen, k. l., & vejlin, r. 2012. return to experience and initial wage level: do low wage workers catch up?  economics working papers, school of economics and management, university of aarhus.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


mackey et al. / scarce human capital  421 spence, m. 2002. signaling in retrospect and the informational structure of markets. american economic review,  92: 434-459. stiglitz, j. e. 1975. the theory of “screening,” education, and the distribution of income. american economic  review, 65: 283-300. tervio, m. 2008. the difference that ceos make: an assignment model approach. american economic review,  98: 642-668. wernerfelt, b. 1984. a resource-based view of the firm. strategic management journal, 5: 171-180. woodcock, s. d. 2008. wage differentials in the presence of unobserved worker, firm, and match heterogeneity.  labour economics, 15: 771-793. wowak, a. j., hambrick, d. c., & henderson, a. d. 2011. do ceos encounter within-tenure settling up? a multi- period perspective on executive pay and dismissal. academy of management journal, 54: 719-739.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 
