

how does supervisory family support   influence employees’ attitudes and behaviors?  a social exchange perspective  jessica bagger california state university, sacramento andrew li  west texas a&m university in this two-study article, the authors investigate the mechanism through which supervisory  family support is linked to outcome variables and examine the moderating effect of family- friendly benefits on this relationship. drawing on social exchange theory, they propose and find  that the quality of leader–member exchange, a form of social exchange relationships, mediated  the relationship between supervisory family support and work-related outcomes in study 1 (n = 82).  furthermore, in study 2 (n = 225), the model linking supervisory family support to outcome  variables through social exchange relationships was moderated by the level of family-friendly  benefits offered by the organization. implications for research and practice are discussed. keywords:  leader–member exchange (lmx); work–family; supervisory family support; family-  friendly benefits; social exchange theory the past half century has seen the dismantling of the industrial world’s traditional fam- ily model. with the rapid entrance of women into the workforce, the traditional family  featuring the husband as breadwinner and the wife as homemaker has been replaced by the  1123 acknowledgments: we would like to thank adam butler, russell cropanzano, and wesley friske for commenting  on earlier drafts of this article. we also are grateful for the many helpful comments and suggestions from dr. wendy  boswell, the associate editor, and from two anonymous reviewers. both authors contributed equally to this article. corresponding author: jessica bagger, college of business administration, california state university, sacramento,  sacramento, ca 95819-6088, usa. e-mail: baggerj@csus.edu journal of management vol. 40 no. 4, may 2014 1123-1150 doi: 10.1177/0149206311413922 © the author(s) 2011 reprints and permissions: sagepub.com/journalspermissions.nav  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1124   journal of management / may 2014 “dual-earner family,” wherein both the husband and wife are gainfully employed (bellavia &  frone, 2005). while this change of family structure has allowed women to work outside  the home, it also fuels significant tension among working parents in demands for resources  from the two competing domains (bagger, li, & gutek, 2008; frone, 2003; kossek &  lambert, 2005). as a testament to this issue, a recent survey shows that almost half of men  and women reported interference between their jobs and their family life (kalleberg, 2008).  these changes have left employees juggling work and family responsibilities, causing  negative outcomes, including lower task performance, less discretionary behavior benefit- ting the organization and the supervisor, and job dissatisfaction (eby, casper, lockwood,  bordeaux, & brinley, 2005). to address this situation, organizations have gone to great lengths to assist employees in  alleviating the distress caused by work–family conflict, such as providing family-friendly  benefits (beauregard & henry, 2009; breaugh & frye, 2008; hammer, neal, newsom,  brockwood, & colton, 2005). yet, research shows that the effects of such benefits, albeit  well intended, tend to be quite marginal when they are not accompanied by informal family  support from supervisors (behson, 2005; rooney & gottlieb, 2007; thompson, jahn,  kopelman, & prottas, 2004). for example, allen (2001) found that family-friendly benefits  explained very little variance on employees’ job attitudes compared with the perceived fam- ily supportiveness of the work environment. these findings have inspired empirical studies  designed to uncover the effects of supervisory family support, or supportive behavior dem- onstrated by supervisors that may reduce the stress employees experience as a result of the  conflict between work and family, on employee attitudes and behaviors (behson, 2005;  carlson & perrewé, 1999; hammer, kossek, yragui, bodner, & hanson, 2009; thomas &  ganster, 1995). researchers have linked supervisory family support to favorable work out- comes, including job satisfaction and lower turnover intentions (breaugh & frye, 2008;  cook, 2009). however, a perusal of the existing literature on supervisory family support reveals two  limitations. first, although recent research has shown that supervisory family support is  influential in reducing work–family conflict (behson, 2005), the mechanism through which  these effects occur has not been adequately explored. a complete understanding of the medi- ating mechanism is critical for the advancement of research on supervisory family support.  we address this limitation by using social exchange theory as our theoretical framework  (blau, 1964; cropanzano & mitchell, 2005). the theory states that goodwill gestures exhib- ited by one party (e.g., using fair decision-making procedures) to the other party may pro- mote the formation of social exchange relationships, which in turn may lead to favorable  outcomes (e.g., job satisfaction and lower turnover intentions). social exchange theory is  well suited to explain the mechanism through which supervisory family support influences  work-related outcomes. in study 1, we examine a model that links supervisory family sup- port to job satisfaction and turnover intentions through the mediating mechanism of leader– member exchange relations (graen & scandura, 1987), a form of social exchange relations. second, although past research has shown that supervisory family support is linked to  positive employee attitudes and behaviors (behson, 2005; hammer et al., 2009), little is  known about the circumstances under which organizations can reap benefits from such support.  this investigation is important against the backdrop of repeated calls for more supervisory  support to assist employees in achieving a balance between their work and family obligations   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1125 (e.g., md-sidin, sambasivan, & ismail, 2010; taylor, delcampo, & blancero, 2009).  knowing the circumstances under which supervisory family support will yield the most  positive outcomes may allow leaders to more appropriately allocate the limited resources at  their disposal (parks, conlon, ang, & bontempo, 1999). to address this limitation, we use  study 2 to examine one possible moderating mechanism: the level of family-friendly bene- fits provided by the organization. although past research has suggested that family-friendly  benefits from the organization and supervisory family support are complementary to each  other in influencing employee attitudes and behaviors (breaugh & frye, 2008), the nature of  their relationship has not yet been clearly delineated in empirical research. therefore, it is  unclear whether the relationship between supervisory family support and work-related out- comes varies as a function of the level of family-friendly benefits provided by the organiza- tion. given this, in study 2, we examine a moderated mediating model tracing the interactive  effects of supervisory family support and family-friendly benefits on employee task perfor- mance and citizenship behavior through the mediating mechanism of social exchange with  supervisors. study 1  theory and hypotheses supervisory family support recent research has shown that one effective managerial intervention to reduce work– family conflict that employees experience is to provide them with supervisory family sup- port (hammer et al., 2009). supervisory family support is one type of social support, which  is defined as “the availability of helping relationships and the quality of social relationships”  (leavy, 1983: 5). supervisory family support is defined as behavior exhibited by supervisors  to their employees that will allow employees to achieve a balance between their responsi- bilities at home and at work (thomas & ganster, 1995). supervisors may signal their sup- port by inquiring about employees’ family needs or expressing concerns and encouragement  to employees who are strained by competition for resources from family and work. supervisors  can also grant assistance such as allowing employees to have more flexible work schedules  to accommodate their family needs or to bring their children to work when child care  arrangements cannot be made (lapierre & allen, 2006). scholars have argued that family  support from supervisors is critical in reducing the work–family conflict that employees  experience (breaugh & frye, 2008; frye & breaugh, 2004). in organizations where formal  family-friendly policies are not available, supervisory family support involves assistance  that is not officially sanctioned. even in organizations where these policies are in place,  employees may be reluctant to utilize them for fear of negative career consequences.  supervisors can assuage these concerns by serving as role models for their employees on  how to integrate work and family (thompson, beauvais, & lyness, 1999). researchers have argued that supervisory family support, driven by supervisors’ goodwill  intentions to help employees balance their work–family demands, may elicit positive  responses from their employees (thompson et al., 1999). specifically, when employees   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1126   journal of management / may 2014 believe that their supervisors care about their family needs, they may respond by having  more positive perceptions of their work environment, in the form of more satisfaction with  their jobs and greater willingness to continue their employment with the organization. these  arguments have received substantial empirical support. for example, in their study of 2,248  wage and salaried workers, anderson, coffey, and byerly (2002) found that supervisory  family support significantly impacted the levels of job satisfaction and turnover intentions.  similarly, using a sample of employees working in multiple grocery stores, hammer,  kossek, anger, bodner, and zimmerman (2011) showed that for employees who experi- enced a high level of family-to-work conflict, training their supervisors on how to become  more family friendly increased these employees’ perceived supervisory family support.  supervisory family support was in turn linked to job satisfaction and turnover intention. to  replicate these findings, we hypothesize the following: hypothesis 1a: supervisory family support is positively related to job satisfaction. hypothesis 1b: supervisory family support is negatively related to turnover intentions. social exchange relationships as a mediator an implicit assumption of the aforementioned studies is that by providing family support  to employees, supervisors establish social exchange relationships with followers (blau,  1964). unlike individuals in an economic exchange relationship guided by the quid pro quo  principle, social exchange partners enjoy considerable discretion in terms of when to return  the favor and by how much (blau, 1964; cropanzano & mitchell, 2005). such open-ended  and continuous exchanges allow supervisors and employees to establish long-term relation- ships that are based on mutual trust and commitment. according to march and simon  (1958), the survival of an organization in general—and a social exchange relationship in  particular—depends on whether employees make sufficient contributions whose inducement  should be deemed adequate relative to these contributions. in other words, employees are  more likely to establish social exchange relationships with their supervisors when they can  achieve an overall balance between their own contributions and the inducements from the  supervisors over time. we argue that supervisory family support may be potentially inter- preted as such inducements that lay the foundation of social exchange relationships (behson,  2002, 2005; hammer et al., 2009). leader–member exchange as an operationalization of social exchange relationships one operationalization of social exchange relationships between employees and their  supervisors is leader–member exchange, or lmx (graen & scandura, 1987; schriesheim,  castro, & cogliser, 1999; sparrowe & liden, 1997). lmx theory stipulates that there exists  different types of exchange relationships between leaders and their subordinates. high- quality exchange relationships are characterized by a high level of mutual trust, respect, and  liking between supervisors and their employees. in this kind of exchange relation, leaders  form role expectations of a subset of their subordinates whose abilities to satisfy these  expectations may be rewarded with more challenging assignments and autonomy at work.   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1127 subordinates also form expectations of leaders’ behaviors. when leaders exhibit behaviors  that are consistent with their subordinates’ expectations, such as providing them with sup- port and giving them more latitude at work, subordinates will reciprocate leaders’ goodwill  gestures by engaging in behaviors that will benefit the leaders and the organization (wang,  law, hackett, wang, & chen, 2005). low-quality exchange relationships, in contrast, are  circumscribed by employment contracts and formal job descriptions. in other words, the  support provided by leaders to their subordinates is limited to what is specified in the  employment contract, and in return, employees tend to perform only what is expected of  them in their job descriptions. as such, this type of exchange relationship tends to be high  in formality and low in trust and mutual liking (graen & uhl-bien, 1995). past research has  used lmx rated by either employees or supervisors (sin, nahrgang, & morgeson, 2009). in  the present study, we used lmx ratings provided by employees. while a majority of existing lmx studies focus on how member characteristics influence  the formation of the exchange relationship, they have overlooked leadership behavior as an  important antecedent (nahrgang, morgeson, & ilies, 2009). this limitation is surprising, as  lmx scholars argue that leaders play a more important role in the development of lmx  than employees do (liden, sparrowe, & wayne, 1997). the beneficial actions from the  supervisors provide the fertile soil needed to nurture a high-quality lmx relationship. for  example, past research has shown that employees evaluate their lmx relationships more  favorably when they have been treated fairly by their supervisors (masterson, lewis,  goldman, & taylor, 2000). similarly, maslyn and uhl-bien (2001) found that the key to  building a high-quality lmx relationship is the effort that one’s exchange partner invests in  the relationship. we believe that the family support provided by supervisors may lead to a high-quality  lmx relationship between supervisors and their employees. lmx scholars argue that the  extent to which employees are motivated to build high-quality lmx relationships with their  supervisors may be determined by whether their supervisors can provide resources that meet  the employees’ critical needs (liden et al., 1997). for example, venkataramani, green, and  schleicher (2010) found that supervisors who are more resourceful (in terms of their net- work positions and their relationships with their own superiors) are more likely to form a  higher level of lmx with their subordinates. in a similar fashion, we argue that supervisors  who provide family support to their employees offer resources that allow employees to  maintain a balance between their work and families and reduce their stress as a result of  juggling between these two domains. social exchange theory states that when one party  provides something of significant value to the other party, it creates the obligation for the  other party to reciprocate (cropanzano & mitchell, 2005). since the family domain is con- sidered to be the most valued domain by most individuals (mortimer, lorence, & kumka,  1986), supervisory family support may promote trust and mutual commitment and generate  the incentives for continuous improvement in the mutual exchange over time (nahrgang  et al., 2009), leading to a higher level of lmx. our argument that supervisory family support may enhance the quality of lmx is also  consistent with research on the development of lmx over time. lmx scholars argue that  the exchange relationship between supervisors and employees evolve from a stranger stage  through an acquaintance stage to the eventual partner stage (graen & uhl-bien, 1995). this   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1128   journal of management / may 2014 developmental cycle coincides with a reduced focus on self-interest, characterizing a quid  pro quo transactional exchange, and more emphasis on mutual trust and collective interest,  characterizing a social exchange. ballinger and rockman (in press) argue that an anchoring  event (or a series of events) that is highly emotional and instrumentally relevant can trans- form the nature and the quality of exchange relationship between leaders and their followers.  we argue that family support from supervisors represents one of these anchoring events that  raise the level of relationship from instrumental exchange to social exchange (wang et al.,  2005). it is important to note that we do not argue or assume that those who have a lesser  need for family support are relegated to low-quality lmx relations with their supervisors.  after all, researchers have suggested that leaders and followers exchange a variety of  resources, and family support is one such resource that is used as a basis of the exchange  relationship (wilson, sin, & conlon, 2010). past research has shown that a high-quality lmx relationship may lead to several posi- tive outcomes (gerstner & day, 1997). researchers argue that employees who enjoy a high- quality lmx with their supervisors may express greater satisfaction with their work and  may be less likely to quit their jobs. these links have indeed been established in empirical  studies. for example, based on a sample of 184 employees and their supervisors working in  a national bank in india, venkataramani and colleagues (2010) found that lmx was posi- tively related to job satisfaction and negatively related to turnover intentions. in a meta- analysis, gerstner and day (1997) found a sizable relationship between lmx and job  satisfaction (corrected r = .50) and turnover intentions (corrected r = –.31). taken together, we argue that when employees receive family support from their supervi- sors, they see the exchange relationship as desirable. a high level of supervisory family  support may represent a form of investment that supervisors make in their employees; as such,  employees feel that they are valued and trusted members of a social exchange relationship  (blau, 1964; gómez & rosen, 2001), which in turn increases their satisfaction with the job  and reduces their intention to leave the organization (dienesch & liden, 1986; graen &  scandura, 1987). although we propose that lmx may mediate the relationship between  supervisory family support and outcome variables, it is important to note that past research  has identified other mechanisms that also may mediate the relationships. for example,  anderson and colleagues (2002) found that work–life conflict mediated the relationship  between supervisory family support and job satisfaction and turnover intentions, such that  supervisory family support reduced the work–life conflict that employees experience, which  in turn increased their job satisfaction and turnover intentions. thompson and prottas (2006)  argued and found that supervisory family support increased employees’ perceived control of  the environment, which in turn increased their job satisfaction and reduced their intention to  quit. neither of these studies reported full mediation, suggesting the need to further investi- gate other mediating mechanisms. additionally, neither of these studies addressed the pos- sibility that family support from supervisors may transform the relationship between  supervisors and employees, leading employees to reciprocate by having more positive per- ceptions of their jobs and increasing their commitment to the organization (by having little  desire to leave). given these findings from previous research, we expect that lmx quality  partially mediates the relationship between supervisor family support and job satisfaction  and turnover intentions. a graphic representation of this model is presented in figure 1.  based on the above, we predict:  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1129 hypothesis 2a: lmx quality partially mediates the effect of supervisory family support on job  satisfaction. hypothesis 2b: lmx quality partially mediates the effect of supervisory family support on turnover  intentions. method participants and procedure we conducted a field study to examine the proposed hypotheses. the research site was  an institution of higher education in a metropolitan city in the southwestern united states.  a total of 125 employees responded to the time 1 survey (62.5% of the total workforce),  while 92 employees responded to the time 2 survey (46% of the total workforce). eighty- two employees (41% of the total workforce) responded to both surveys. the average age of  the participants was 31.54 (sd = 10.46). employees reported working an average of 42 hours  per week (sd = 8.77) and had an average tenure of 3.37 years (sd = 3.79). among the  respondents, 53.7% were male and 59.3% had a spouse. a majority (77%) did not have  young children (younger than 17 years old). employees of this institution participate in bimonthly organizational training workshops.  the first author attended one of these workshops and requested assistance from the partici- pants. paper-and-pencil surveys were distributed to those willing to participate. two months  later, the first author again attended a workshop to distribute the second survey. this design  allows for temporal separation between predictor and outcome variables. to ensure confi- dentiality, each respondent created a unique six-digit number, which allowed us to match the  two surveys. to encourage participation, each participant was given a $5 gift card upon  completion of both surveys. given that we observed sample attrition from time 1 to time 2,  we compared the sample characteristics (age, gender, tenure, and work hours) of those  note: lmx = leader–member exchange. figure 1 hypothesized model (study 1) supervisory family support job sasfacon turnover intenons lmx quality  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1130   journal of management / may 2014 participants who responded to both surveys with those of participants who failed to respond  to the first one. we did not find significant differences between the two groups. additionally,  the human resources department confirmed that our sample characteristics were representative  of all employees in the organization. measures responses to all scale items were rated on a 5-point continuum (1 = strongly disagree to  5 = strongly agree). cronbach’s alpha is reported in table 1. supervisory family support. supervisory family support was measured at time 1 with  three items from clark (2001). the three items are “my supervisor listens when i talk about  my family,” “my supervisor understands my family needs,” and “my supervisor acknowl- edges that i have obligations as a family member.” leader–member exchange quality. lmx, which was measured at time 2, consisted of  seven items developed by scandura and graen (lmx-7; 1984). this measure reflects the  extent to which employees believe that they have high-quality relationships with their super- visors. a sample item is “i have an effective working relationship with my supervisor.” job satisfaction. job satisfaction was measured at time 2 with three items from the  michigan organizational assessment questionnaire (camman, fichman, jenkins, & klesh,  1979). a sample job satisfaction item is “all in all, i am satisfied with my job.” table 1 means, standard deviations, and intercorrelations among study variables (study 1) variable m sd 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  1. age (t2) 31.54 10.46 –  2. gender (t2) 0.54 0.50 .11 –  3. relationship status (t2) 0.59 0.49 .22* –.23* –  4. children (t2) 0.34 0.76 .38** .15 .18 –  5. work hours (t2) 42.02 8.77 .21 .14 .26* .03 –  6. tenure (t2) 3.37 3.79 .54** .03 .35** .19 .23* –  7.  supervisory family    support (t1) 4.21 0.75 –.04 –.06 .20 .20 –.03 .13 (.87)  8.  leader–member    exchange (t2) 3.76 0.67 –.13 .07 –.03 .05 –.14 .02 .36** (.88)  9. job satisfaction (t2) 4.08 0.82 –.01 .08 .17 .20 .14 .15 .52** .57** (.88) 10. turnover intentions (t2) 2.71 1.01 –.26* –.02 –.25* –.34 –.11 –.37** –.34** –.35** –.65** (.78) note: n = 82. t1 = time 1; t2 = time 2. for gender, 0 = female, 1 = male; for spouse, 0 = single, 1 = spouse/ partner. cronbach’s alpha is shown on the diagonal. *p < .05. **p < .01.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1131 turnover intentions. the second dependent variable was also measured at time 2. turnover  intentions was measured with three items from cropanzano, howes, grandey, and toth  (1997). a sample item is “i intend to leave [name of the organization] within the next year.” control variables. we included six control variables; all were measured at time 2. since  one’s family status and demographics may influence family needs, we inquired about partici- pants’ number of children under the age of 17, relationship status (0 = single, 1 = spouse/partner),  gender (0 = female, 1 = male), and age (in years). work-related control variables included  their average number of work hours per week and their tenure with the organization (in years). results and discussion means, standard deviations, and intercorrelations are presented in table 1. confirmatory factor analysis we conducted a confirmatory factor analysis on supervisory family support, lmx, job  satisfaction, and turnover intentions to verify their independent nature. the four-factor struc- ture (c2 = 178.55, df = 98, p < .001; comparative fit index [cfi] = .98, incremental fit index  [ifi] = .98, root mean square error of approximation [rmsea] = .10) was superior to the  one-factor structure (c2 = 396.08, df = 104, p < .001; cfi = .94, ifi = .94, rmsea = .19; dc2  = 217.53, df = 6, p < .001). bivariate analysis hypothesis 1 states that supervisor family support is positively related to job satisfaction  (hypothesis 1a) and negatively related to turnover intentions (hypothesis 1b). as expected,  results of the bivariate correlations indicate that supervisory family support was significantly  correlated with job satisfaction (r = .52, p < .01) and turnover intentions (r = –.34, p < .01).  thus, hypotheses 1a and 1b were supported. in addition, we found that supervisory family  support was moderately and significantly correlated with lmx. mediating analysis hierarchical regression was employed to examine the meditating hypotheses. hypothesis  2a states that lmx quality mediates the relationship between supervisory family support and  job satisfaction. supervisory family support was significantly correlated with the mediator,  lmx quality (b = .39, p < .01), meeting the first condition of mediation (baron & kenny,  1986). supervisory family support was significantly correlated with job satisfaction (b = .59,  p < .01), satisfying the second mediation requirement. we then entered the mediator. the  mediator was also a significant predictor of job satisfaction (b = .39, p < .01), meeting the  third requirement. finally, most importantly, with the inclusion of the mediator, the relationship   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1132   journal of management / may 2014 between supervisory family support and job satisfaction became reduced (b = .44, p < .01; see  table 2). we also confirmed the mediating model with sobel’s (1982) test  (z = 2.63, p < .01). as such, lmx partially mediated the relationship between supervi- sory family support and job satisfaction, supporting hypothesis 2a (james, mulaik, &  brett, 2006). hypothesis 2b states that lmx quality mediates the relationship between supervisory fam- ily support and turnover intentions. supervisory family support was significantly correlated  with the mediator, lmx quality (b = .39, p < .01), meeting the first condition of mediation  (baron & kenny, 1986). supervisory family support was significantly correlated with turn- over intentions (b = –.35, p < .01), satisfying the second mediation requirement. we then  entered the mediator. the mediator was also a significant predictor of turnover intentions  (b = –.24, p < .05), meeting the third requirement. finally, most importantly, with the inclu- sion of the mediator, the relationship between supervisory family support and turnover inten- tions became reduced (b = –.25, p < .05; see table 2). this reduction was again significant  by sobel’s (1982) test (z = –1.96, p < .05). thus, lmx partially mediated the relationship  between supervisory family support and turnover intentions, supporting hypothesis 2b. study 2 theory and hypotheses results of study 1 show that discretionary family support from supervisors provided the  basis for building high-quality lmx relationships with employees. in turn, this high-quality  exchange relationship yielded significant payoffs for the organization (gerstner & day,  1997; ilies, nahrgang, & morgeson, 2007). that is, when their supervisors were perceived  table 2 mediating analyses (study 1) job satisfaction turnover intentions variable b total r2 dr2 b total r2 dr2 step 1: control variables children .11 –.17 relationship status .20 –.12 gender .01 .07 age –.18 –.12 work hours .02 .07 organizational tenure .28* .14 –.34** .27 step 2: independent variable supervisory family support .59** .44 .30 –.35** .38 .11 step 3: mediator leader–member exchange .39** –.24* supervisory family support .44** .56 .12 –.25* .42 .04 note: n = 82. *p < .05. **p < .01.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1133 as family supportive, employees were more content with their jobs and had little desire to  leave the organization. as such, study 1 fills a substantial gap in the work–family literature  by identifying a mechanism—lmx quality—as the linkage between supervisory family  support and work-related outcomes. study 2 was designed to accomplish three goals. first, although study 1 allows us to  understand the mechanism through which supervisory family support influences outcome  variables, little is known about the condition under which such support may have greater (or  less) impact on outcome variables. therefore, the first goal of study 2 is to build on study 1  by examining the level of family-friendly benefits provided by the organization as a mod- erator of the mediating model linking supervisory family support to outcome variables  through social exchange relationships. second, to combat same-source bias, which is preva- lent in the work–family literature (casper, eby, bordeaux, lockwood, & lambert, 2007;  likewise, our sample in study 1), we use task performance and citizenship behavior rated by  supervisors as the outcome variables. third, instead of using one sample from a single orga- nization (the most commonly used sampling method in the work–family literature; also, our  sample in study 1), we opted to use participants recruited from a broad range of sources.  this strategy is necessary because it provides enough variance on the level of family-friendly  benefits offered in the workplace. hence, in the following, we describe a moderated mediating model of supervisory family  support. in this model, supervisory family support and family-friendly benefits interact to  predict job performance and citizenship behavior toward supervisor (ocb-s), and these  effects are mediated by employees’ social exchanges with their supervisors. a graphic  representation of this model is presented in figure 2. figure 2 hypothesized model (study 2) supervisory family support task performance ocb-supervisor social exchange with supervisor family- friendly beneﬁts note: ocb-s = citizenship behavior toward supervisor.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1134   journal of management / may 2014  interaction between supervisory family support and family-friendly benefits on  social exchanges although past research has demonstrated that supervisory family support may reduce the  negative impact of juggling work and family, it is unclear under what circumstances its  effects may be more or less pronounced. in the present study, we propose that one such  circumstance is the level of family-friendly benefits offered by the organization. past  research suggests that supervisors have considerable discretion over the types and level of  family support that employees receive (den dulk & de ruijter, 2008; mccarthy, darcy, &  grady, 2010), irrespective of whether family-friendly benefits are provided by the organi- zation. when there are few (or no) formal benefits offered, the supervisor becomes the only  source of support that employees can count on to address the conflict between work and  family. in this situation, employees may be particularly indebted to supervisors who pro- vide support to them since these actions are not officially sanctioned. the lack of family- friendly benefits from official sources may also provide supervisors with opportunities to  show employees individualized consideration and demonstrate sensitivity to their needs to  maintain a work–life balance (avolio, zhu, koh, & bhatia, 2004). such family support  from supervisors stands in stark contrast to the lack of care characterizing the larger envi- ronment of the organization, making supervisory family support highly salient. this argu- ment is akin to research on the interaction between procedural justice and outcome  favorability (brockner & wiesenfeld, 1996). specifically, employees respond more posi- tively to a supervisor’s procedural fairness when they experience negative outcomes.  similarly, when family-friendly benefits are meager (a negative outcome), employees may  respond more strongly to nice gestures shown by their supervisors. this argument suggests  that employees may return the favor by forming a high-quality exchange relationship with  their leaders. in contrast, when the level of family-friendly benefits is high, employees can draw  family support not only from their direct supervisors but also from official channels. as  such, it follows that the effects of supervisory family support on the social exchange rela- tionship are somewhat weakened given that employees can obtain support from alternative  sources. in other words, supervisory family support may have less impact because it is less  salient when support also is available from the organization (as family-friendly benefits).  this is consistent with the notion of leadership substitutes, which refers to factors reduc- ing the effects of leadership actions (kerr & jermier, 1978). in other words, family- friendly benefits from the organization serve as a substitute that neutralizes (moderates)  the effects of supervisory family support. as indirect support to our argument, one mod- erator of leadership behavior that has been demonstrated in the leadership substitute lit- erature is organizational reward (podsakoff, mackenzie, ahearne, & bommer, 1995).  thus, we predict: hypothesis 3: supervisory family support interacts with the level of family-friendly benefits to  predict social exchange with supervisors, such that the relationship is stronger when the level of  family-friendly benefit is low.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1135  interaction between supervisory family support and family-friendly benefits on  performance we focus on the interactive effects of supervisory family support and family-friendly  benefits on two aspects of employee behavior at work: task performance and ocb-s. task  performance is defined as the extent to which employees adequately complete what is  required of them in the job specification (williams & anderson, 1991). past research has  shown that employees may experience a high level of strain when juggling conflicting  demands for resources from family and from work (frone, 2003). family support from  supervisors, such as expressing concerns to employees and providing time off to handle fam- ily issues, may alleviate the high level of stress that employees experience and allow them  to meet their obligations and responsibilities at home (clark, 2001). when employees  believe that their supervisors genuinely care about their well-being and allow them to meet  their family needs without sacrificing their careers, they may perceive a sense of obligation  to reciprocate the received family support. past research has suggested that performance can  serve as a currency that employees use to meet their exchange obligations and to return the  favor to their supervisors (wang et al., 2005). as we argued previously, the effects of supervisory family support may depend on the  level of family-friendly benefits provided by the organization. when the level of family- friendly benefits is low, supervisory family support may become especially essential. as  such, employees may perceive a sense of indebtedness to their supervisors for their empathy  with employees’ desires to balance work and family responsibilities. when employees  believe that they benefit from the generosity of their supervisors, they may reciprocate by  performing at a higher level to maintain a balanced social exchange with their supervisors.  when the level of family-friendly benefits is high, however, employees may attribute the  support from their supervisors as part of the broader effort of the organization, thus lessening  the effects of supervisory family support on their work performance (major, fletcher, davis,  & germano, 2008; see also allen, 2001). as such, we predict: hypothesis 4: supervisory family support interacts with the level of family-friendly benefits to  predict performance, such that the relationship is stronger when the level of family-friendly  benefit is low.  interaction between supervisory family support and family-friendly benefits on  ocb-s we also investigate the interactive effects of supervisory family support and family- friendly benefits on ocb-s. ocb-s is defined as extra-role behaviors performed by employ- ees to benefit their supervisors (gerstner & day, 1997). ocb-s may include such behaviors  as helping supervisors when the workload is heavy or providing them with suggestions to  improve unit performance. social exchange theory stipulates that employees in a high- quality exchange relationship with their supervisors may go above and beyond the call of  duty to maintain and to further develop the relationship (ilies et al., 2007). supervisory family   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1136   journal of management / may 2014 support may reduce employees’ work–family conflict and allow them to enjoy a high level  of family satisfaction without undermining their performance and career prospects. as such,  employees who benefit from the family support may be motivated to engage in discretionary  behavior to benefit their supervisors as a way of expressing their gratitude. however, the extent to which employees engage in ocb-s to reciprocate may be moder- ated by the level of available family-friendly policies. a high level of family support from  supervisors in the absence of family-friendly policies at the organizational level may accen- tuate its impact on employees. in other words, employees may come to rely on their supervi- sors for family support since they receive little support elsewhere. as such, they may be  more likely to make discretionary contributions in the form of ocb-s (even though these  behaviors are not recognized as an official part of their job descriptions) in order to maintain  an equitable exchange relationship with their supervisors. in contrast, the role of supervisors  may be less important when family support can be obtained from the official sources. past  research has shown that employees’ dependence on supervisors may be related to the quality  of exchange relationships they establish with their supervisors (schyns, kroon, & moors,  2008). when employees perceive less need to depend on the support from their supervisors  as a result of the support available elsewhere, they may be less likely to engage in ocb-s  to maintain a social exchange relationship with their supervisors. as such, we predict: hypothesis 5: supervisory family support interacts with the level of family-friendly benefits to  predict ocb-s, such that the relationship is stronger when the level of family-friendly benefit  is low. social exchange with supervisor as a mediator past research has linked social exchange to both performance and ocb-s, suggesting that  employees in high-quality exchange relationships with their supervisors may use perfor- mance and ocb-s as currencies to pay back received supervisory family support (e.g.,  wayne, shore, bommer, & tetrick, 2002). based on this, and our earlier arguments, we  further predict that the interactive effects of supervisory family support and family-friendly  benefits on performance and ocb-s may be mediated by social exchange relations. in other  words, social exchange may explain how supervisory family support and family-friendly  benefits interact to influence outcome variables. when the level of family-friendly benefits  is low, employees may seek to establish social exchange relationships with their supervisors  and may use high performance and more ocb-s to fulfill their obligations for reciprocity.  in contrast, in the presence of a high level of family-friendly policies, the family support  from supervisors may not be as critical for employees, which may also reduce their motiva- tion to establish high-quality exchange relationships with their supervisors and their propen- sity to perform at a high level and to engage in extra-role behaviors. as such, we predict: hypothesis 6: social exchange with supervisors partially mediates the relationship between the  interaction of supervisory family support and the level of family-friendly benefits and employee  performance and ocb-s.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1137 it is important to note that we do not dispute the importance of supervisory family support,  as past research has suggested that such support is more important to employees’ well-being  than are family-friendly benefits (thompson et al., 2004). we simply argue that its effect  may be less pronounced in the presence of a high level of family-friendly benefits. method participants and procedure students, following a standard recruiting protocol, were given course extra credit for  identifying qualified participants for this study (casper & harris, 2008). in order to qualify,  participants were required to (1) work at least 30 hours per week in a paid job (outside a  family business or the university), (2) be able to read english, (3) have internet access, and  (4) have an immediate supervisor who would be willing to complete a separate brief online  survey. all study participants and their supervisors were entered in a drawing for cash  prizes. participants included 225 employees and their supervisors from a metropolitan area  in the western united states. participants received a cover letter that explained the pur- pose of the study, including a web address and an identification number with which they  accessed the survey. a similar cover letter was given to each participant’s supervisor.  we used the identification number to match the employee to his or her supervisor upon  completion of the surveys. the mean age of the employee was 38 (sd = 9.9). among  these participants, 140 (62.2%) were women and 189 (84%) reported that they were  married or in a significant relationship. participants reported working 40 hours (sd = 10.84)  a week on average and spending 33 hours (sd = 20.58) on household activities  every week. as a check on data quality, the authors called about 15% of study participants to verify  their participation. every respondent was asked a number of demographic questions that  matched the questions asked in the survey (e.g., their age, the number of the children and  their respective ages). all respondents were able to accurately answer the questions (i.e.,  their answers matched what they reported in the survey). this data collection procedure has  been employed extensively in different literatures, including studies investigating work– family issues (e.g., casper & harris, 2008; reeve & smith, 2000; smith, tisak, hahn, &  schmieder, 1997; smith, tisak, & schmieder, 1993). measures: employees level of family-friendly benefits provided. we asked about 13 family-friendly benefits,  such as flexible scheduling and telecommuting (hammer et al., 2005). respondents were  asked to indicate whether each benefit was offered by their employing organizations (1 = yes,  0 = no/i don’t know).  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1138   journal of management / may 2014 supervisory family support. supervisory family support was measured with a nine-item  scale (thomas & ganster, 1995). participants were asked to indicate to what extent  (1 = never to 5 = very often) their supervisors engage in nine different family-supportive  behaviors. a sample item is “my supervisor switches schedules to accommodate my family  responsibilities.” social exchange relationship with the supervisor. an employee’s social exchange rela- tionship with his or her supervisor was measured with an eight-item scale from rupp and  cropanzano (2002). responses were rated on a 7-point continuum (1 = strongly disagree  to 7 = strongly agree). a sample item is “the supervisor has made a significant investment  in me.” control variables. we included four control variables that have been shown to relate to  work–family issues. first, we controlled for the number of children under the age of 17. we  also controlled for the employee’s relationship status (0 = single, 1 = spouse/partner), gen- der (0 = female, 1 = male), and the number of hours he or she worked every week. measures: supervisors task performance. performance was measured using a seven-item scale from williams  and anderson (1991). responses to the measures were rated on a 7-point continuum  (1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree). a sample item is “in general, your employee  adequately completes assigned duties.” ocb-s. ocb-s was measured with five items from rupp and cropanzano (2002).  the supervisor was asked to indicate how often (1 = never to 5 = very often) his or her  subordinate engages in citizenship behaviors directed at the supervisor. a sample  ocb-s item is “how often does your subordinate help you when you have a heavy work  load.” analytical strategy to examine whether the interactive effects of supervisory family support and family- friendly benefits on performance and ocb-s are mediated by social exchange relations with  supervisors, we conducted a moderated mediation analysis (preacher, rucker, & hayes,  2007). first, we examined whether the interactive effects influence the proposed mediator:  social exchange with supervisors. second, we examined whether the interactive effects  influence the proposed outcome variables: performance and ocb-s. third, we again exam- ined whether the interactive effects influence the proposed outcome variable, when the  mediator is controlled for. finally, we used bootstrapping analysis to examine the signifi- cance of the conditioned indirect effects.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1139 results means, standard deviations, and correlations among the studied variables are reported in  table 3. confirmatory factor analysis we conducted a confirmatory factor analysis on supervisory family support and social  exchange relationship with the organization, both of which were reported by the employee.  the two-factor structure (c2 = 216.76, df = 108, p < .001; cfi = .93, ifi = .93, rmsea = .067)  was superior to the one-factor structure (c2 = 345.46, df = 109, p < .001; cfi = .84, ifi = .85,  rmsea = .098; dc2 = 128.7, df = 1, p < .001). similarly, the two-factor structure (c2 = 69.76,  df = 52, p < .001; cfi = .99, ifi = .99, rmsea = .039) of performance and ocb-s reported  by supervisors was superior to the one-factor structure (c2 = 452.39, df = 53, p < .001;  cfi = .74, ifi = .74, rmsea = .183; dc2 = 382.63, df = 1, p < .001). moderating analysis hypothesis 3 states that supervisory family support interacts with family-friendly benefits  to predict social exchange relationships with supervisors, such that the relationship is stron- ger when the level of family-friendly benefit is low. following cohen, cohen, west, and  aiken (2003), we standardized all the independent variables and the control variables. we  first entered the control variables into the regression equation, followed by supervisory fam- ily support and family-friendly benefits. in the third step, we entered the interaction term. as  hypothesized, the interactions were significant (b = –.14, t = –2.35, p < .05; see table 4). as  table 3 means, standard deviations, and intercorrelations among study variables (study 2) variable m sd 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1. gender 0.38 0.49 – 2. children 1.36 0.91 0 – 3. relationship status 0.84 0.37 .19* .18** – 4. work hours 40.05 10.84 .11 .03 .07 – 5. supervisory family support 3.53 0.61 –.01 –.01 –.10 –.07 (.60) 6. family-friendly benefits 4.55 2.19 .03 –.14* .05 .11 .14* – 7. social exchange with supervisor 3.88 0.69 0 –.04 –.02 –.02 .55** .16* (.88) 8. performance 4.43 0.54 –.11 –.03 .02 .01 .17* .11 .22** (.84) 9. ocb-s 3.89 0.74 .03 .03 0 –.02 .25** .06 .29** .33** (.83) note: n = 225. ocb-s = citizenship behavior toward supervisor. for gender, 0 = female, 1 = male; for family status,  0 = single, 1 = committed relationship. cronbach’s alpha is shown on the diagonal. *p < .05. **p < .01.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1140   journal of management / may 2014 can be seen in figure 3, supervisory family support was more strongly related to social  exchange relationships with supervisors when the level of family-friendly benefits provided  by the organization was low (b = .47, t = 7.46, p < .05) rather than high (b = .28, t = 4.44,  p < .05). hypothesis 3 received full support. table 4 hierarchical regression analyses (study 2) social exchange with  supervisor performance ocb-s variable b total r2 dr2 b total r2 dr2 b total r2 dr2 step 1: control variables gender .02 -.13 .02 relationship status -.03 .05 .01 children -.05 -.01 .03 work hours -.02 .01 .02 .01 -.02 0 step 2: main effects supervisory family support (sfs) .55** .15* .26** family-friendly benefits (ffb) .07 .31 .30 .08 .05 .04 .02 .07 .07 step 3: interactions sfs × ffb -.14* .33 .02 -.24** .11 .06 -.17** .10 .03 note: n = 225. ocb-s = citizenship behavior toward supervisor. *p < .05. **p < .01. figure 3 interactive effects of supervisory family support and   family-friendly benefits on social exchange with supervisors  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1141 hypothesis 4 states that supervisory family support interacts with family-friendly benefits  to predict performance, such that the relationship is stronger when the level of family- friendly benefit is low. as hypothesized, the interaction was significant (b = –.24, t = –3.58,  p < .05; see table 4). as can be seen in figure 4, supervisory family support was more  strongly related to performance when the level of family-friendly benefits provided by the  organization was low (b = .21, t = 4.56, p < .05) rather than high (b = –.06, t = 4.56, ns).  accordingly, hypothesis 4 was fully supported. hypothesis 5 states that supervisory family support interacts with family-friendly benefits  to predict ocb-s, such that the relationship is stronger when the level of family-friendly  benefit is low. as hypothesized, the interaction was significant (b = –.17, t = –2.62, p < .05;  see table 4). the relationship between supervisory family support and ocb-s was much  stronger when the level of family-friendly benefits provided by the organization was low (b  = .32, t = 4.10, p < .05; see figure 5) rather than high (b = .05, t = .65, ns). as such,  hypothesis 5 was fully supported. hypothesis 6 states that the interactions between supervisory family support and family- friendly benefits on performance and ocb-s are partially mediated by social exchange  relationship with supervisors. when social exchange relationship with supervisors was  entered into the regression equation, the interaction was still a significant predictor of per- formance (b = –.20, t = –3.25, p < .05), although the effects were somewhat weaker.  similarly, when social exchange relationships with supervisors was controlled for, the inter- action was still a significant predictor of ocb-s (b = –.13, t = –2.23 p < .05), although  the effects were a bit weaker. to further understand the mediating effects, we conducted a  figure 4 interactive effects of supervisory family support   and family-friendly benefits on performance  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1142   journal of management / may 2014 bootstrapping analysis. the indirect effect of the interactions between supervisory family  support and family-friendly benefits on performance through social exchange relationship  with supervisors was significant (z = 1.84, p < .05, one-tailed). also, the indirect effect of  the interactions between supervisory family support and family-friendly benefits on ocb-s  through social exchange relationship with supervisors was significant (z = 2.29, p < .05).  these findings provide full support for hypothesis 6. general discussion in the present study, we tested a moderated social exchange model of family support. in  doing so, we strived to address two limitations in the current literature. first, we provided a  process model that accounts for the effects of supervisory family support on outcome vari- ables. second, we expanded our model to account for the moderating effects of family- friendly benefits. in all, two field studies were supportive of our hypotheses. in study 1, we investigated a mechanism linking supervisory family support to two out- come variables: job satisfaction and turnover intentions. consistent with past research  (thomas & ganster, 1995), supervisory family support was related to both outcome vari- ables. however, what is unique about the current study is that we found that a social exchange  variable—here operationalized as lmx quality—served as a mediating mechanism (liden  et al., 1997). past research has highlighted a number of ways that supervisors can facilitate  the formation of social exchange relationships, such as treating employees fairly (masterson  et al., 2000) and investing in employees’ career development (hom et al., 2009). our study  figure 5 interactive effects of supervisory family support and family-friendly   benefits on citizenship behavior toward supervisor (ocb-s)  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1143 complements this line of research by showing that one additional way to nurture a high- quality social exchange relationship is to provide family support to employees. our findings  provide additional support to recent research suggesting that the extent to which employees  are able to access valuable resources from their supervisors may influence the quality of  exchange relationships between them and their supervisors (venkataramani et al., 2010).  the more resources employees can accrue from their leaders, the more they see them as  attractive exchange partners, increasing employees’ motivation to establish exchange rela- tionships with the leaders (erdogan & enders, 2007). our study expands the traditional lmx research in two very important ways. first, unlike  past research that tends to focus on followers’ characteristics as antecedents of lmx, we  found that one type of leadership behavior—the extent to which supervisors provide family  support to their followers—may also enhance lmx (nahrgang et al., 2009). second, while  past research tends to focus on work domain variables as predictors of lmx, we here shift  the focus to the family domain by studying supervisory family support (liden et al., 1997).  these results also have theoretical implications for work–family research. responding to  calls (major & cleveland, 2007; major et al., 2008; major & morganson, 2011) to integrate  work–family and leadership literature, this study links lmx to an understudied construct:  supervisory family support. as we uncovered in this study, supervisory family support cre- ates a context that facilitates the formation of high-quality exchange relationships between  supervisors and their employees. in study 2, we expand our theoretical model to reflect a contingency perspective. we  include family-friendly benefits as a moderator of the relationship between supervisory fam- ily support and social exchange with supervisors and the relationship between supervisory  family support and outcome variables. consistent with our prediction, supervisory family  support is more strongly related to the mediator and the outcome variables when the level of  family-friendly benefits is low. these findings suggest that when formal support from the  organization (family-friendly benefits) is low, employees are more likely to notice and  appreciate the family support provided by their supervisors. in exchange for the family sup- port from the supervisors, employees perform at a higher level, both in-role and extra-role  behaviors. these findings are consistent with research showing that employees who experi- ence the most work–family conflict (thus, who have the greatest need for family support  from supervisors) respond most favorably to supportive behaviors exhibited by their super- visors as a result of the supervisory family support training given by the authors (hammer  et al., 2011). our results are also consistent with research showing that employees who have  access to resources from alternative sources may find it less critical to establish a high level  of social exchange relationships with their supervisors (venkataramani et al., 2010).  these results have theoretical implications for research on supervisory family support.  past research tends to focus on supervisory family support either as a predictor of employ- ees’ attitudes or behaviors (support serves as a direct resource; e.g., aryee, 1992; carlson &  perrewé, 1999) or as a moderator on the relationship between stressors and employee out- comes (support enhances individuals’ abilities to cope; e.g., luk & shaffer, 2005; md-sidin  et al., 2010; paden & buehler, 1995). however, there are very few empirical studies examin- ing the conditions under which the effects of supervisory family support would be enhanced  (e.g., lu et al., 2009). as such, we advance the literature by showing that one such condition  is when the level of family-friendly benefits provided by the organization is low.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1144   journal of management / may 2014 we found that supervisory family support was not significantly related to performance  and ocb-s when the level of family-friendly benefits was high. this finding, while some- what counterintuitive (given that past research has suggested that benefits alone are not  sufficient to influence employees’ attitudes and behaviors without informal family support  from supervisors; behson, 2005), is consistent with past research showing that organiza- tional rewards can substitute for leadership behavior (podsakoff et al., 1995). practical implications past research has shown that there are multiple organizational benefits associated with  providing supervisory family support to employees (frone, yardley, & markel, 1997;  gajendran & harrison, 2007; wilson et al., 2010). we found that one implication of offering  such support is that employees are more motivated to establish exchange relationships in  response to the support they receive. these relationships, once they are established, provide  a platform for employees to reciprocate in the form of work attitudes (study 1: higher job  satisfaction and lower turnover intentions) and behaviors (study 2: higher task performance  and more ocb directed at the supervisor) that are more positive. these findings suggest that  supporting employees to have a more balanced life is not simply an “acting nice” gesture. it  also makes good business sense, as positive employee attitudes and behaviors ultimately  contribute favorably to the bottom line of the organization. from this perspective, our results  are consistent with research showing that family support is linked to better organizational- level performance (arthur, 2003). when employees juggle to manage competing demands from work and family and have  little support from their organizations, the unofficial support from their supervisors becomes  all the more important. our results indicate that employees responded more positively to  support from their supervisors when the family-friendly benefits they received from their  organizations were low. these findings suggest that while in general managers are well  advised to provide support to employees to help them deal with work–life balance issues,  managers should be more proactive in reaching out to their employees and accommodating  their needs when organizational initiatives, in the form of family-friendly benefits, fall short.  thus we echo taylor et al.’s (2009) call for training to help managers learn how to provide  better family support to their subordinates. limitations and strengths this study is not without limitations. first, we relied on perceptual measures for both  studies, thus risking common method variance. this concern, however, is largely assuaged  by the temporal separation of responses to the measures in study 1 and the use of responses  from multiple sources in study 2 (podsakoff, mackenzie, lee, & podsakoff, 2003). second, study 1 had a relatively small sample size, although we addressed this issue with  a much larger sample size in study 2. study 2, however, may be faulted by using a sample  from a variety of sources, which renders it impossible to establish a common baseline across   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1145 all the participants. for example, the provision of certain family-friendly benefits is more  commonplace in some industries relative to others; as such, their implications for social  exchange relationships and outcome variables may also vary. third, in study 1, we hypothesized and found that lmx mediated the relationship  between supervisory family support and job satisfaction and turnover intentions. our prem- ise is that high-quality social exchange relations may result when supervisors provide sup- port to their employees to achieve a balance between work and family. however, it is also  quite plausible that supervisors may be motivated to provide more family support to employ- ees with whom they share a high level of lmx. this argument would suggest that lmx is  a predictor rather than an outcome of supervisory family support. our preference for the  model tested in study 1 (lmx as an outcome variable of supervisory family support) rests  on the empirical literature on social support. for example, carlson and perrewé (1999) com- pared four models featuring social support as a predictor, a moderator, a mediator, and an  antecedent of work–family related outcomes. their study found that the model featuring  social support as an antecedent received the strongest empirical support. similarly, wayne  and colleagues (2002) found a significant path from social support to lmx, whereas the path  from lmx to social support was not significant (see also masterson et al., 2000). our con- fidence in the hypothesized model in study 1 is also buttressed by similar findings in our  study 2, despite the fact that different measures of supervisory family support and social  exchange relationships were used. nevertheless, since we did not measure lmx and super- visory family support at both time periods, we cannot completely rule out the possibility of  a reversed relationship. it is possible that lmx and supervisory family support form a posi- tive cycle whereby they positively affect and reinforce each other.1 this possibility should  be investigated in future research. similarly, since we used a cross-sectional design in  study 2, caution should be exercised when inferring causality. for example, it is possible  that employees who have excellent work performance tend to have high-quality exchange  relationships with their supervisors, who may be more motivated to provide them with family  support (in order to retain them). these limitations should not eclipse the strengths of this article. first, two empirical field  studies were used and convergent results were found, which greatly strengthens our confi- dence in these findings. second, most of the studies in the work–family literature tend to use  a cross-sectional design (casper et al., 2007), which we address in our study with a design  that separates temporal responses to study measures (study 1). third, to address the same- source bias commonly observed in the work–family literature (casper et al., 2007), we used  performance and citizenship behaviors rated by a different source, participants’ supervisors  (study 2). directions for future research first, the present study focused on two sources of family support: supervisor and organi- zation. future research should investigate additional sources of support. for example, recent  research has started to shed light on the role of coworkers on employees’ tendency to use family- friendly policies at work (major et al., 2008; mcmanus, korabik, rosin, & kelloway, 2002).   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1146   journal of management / may 2014 in the article “are you too family friendly?” wells (2007) argued that single and childless  workers may perceive a sense of unfairness when they have to pick up the “slack” due to the  excessive use of family-friendly policies by working parents. this argument suggests that  even when family-friendly benefits are available, employees may be less inclined to use  them when they sense resentment from their coworkers. in contrast, support from coworkers to  achieve work–life balance may lead to the formation of social exchange relationships  between employees and their coworkers, which may lead to desirable work outcomes. this  possibility should be investigated in future studies. second, past research has identified a third type of workplace family support in addition  to supervisory family support and family-friendly benefits: family-friendly organizational  culture. a family-friendly culture refers to the norms and values collectively shared by  members of a unit, such as whether it is acceptable to communicate with each other about  family concerns or whether individuals need to place one’s work ahead of family obligations  (thompson et al., 1999). allen (2001) found that a family-friendly culture explained unique  variance on outcome variables when supervisory family support and family-friendly benefits  were controlled for. future research should examine whether employees respond more  positively to supervisory family support when the work culture emphasizes excellence in  work performance at the expense of family responsibilities. finally, future research should examine other variables that may moderate the effects of  supervisory family support. one example is family identity salience (amatea, cross, clark,  & bobby, 1986; bagger et al., 2008), defined as the extent to which individuals identify with  their family role. when family identity is salient, individuals are more likely to derive mean- ing from their family role and invest more resources, such as time and energy, into their  family domain. since individuals high on family identity are more concerned about and  committed to the well-being and success of their family role, they may respond more posi- tively to supervisory behavior intended to help them achieve positive family-related outcomes.  this possibility should be investigated in future research. note 1. we thank a reviewer for this suggestion. references allen, t. d. 2001. family-supportive work environments: the role of organizational perceptions. journal of  vocational behavior, 58: 414-435. amatea, e., cross, e., clark, j., & bobby, c. 1986. assessing the work and family role expectations of career- oriented men and women: the life role salience scales. journal of marriage and the family, 48: 831-838. anderson, s. e., coffey, b. s., & byerly, r. t. 2002. formal organizational initiatives and informal workplace  practices: links to work–family conflict and job-related outcomes. journal of management, 28: 787-810. arthur, m. 2003. share price reactions to work–family initiatives: an institutional perspective. academy of  management journal, 46: 497-505. aryee, s. 1992. antecedents and outcomes of work–family conflict among married professional women: evidence  from singapore. human relations, 45: 813-837. avolio, b., zhu, w., koh, w., & bhatia, p. 2004. transformational leadership and organizational commitment:  mediating role of psychological empowerment and moderating role of structural distance. journal of  organizational behavior, 25: 951-968.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1147 bagger, j., li, a., & gutek, b. a. 2008. how much do you value your family and does it matter? the joint effects  of family identity salience, family-interference-with-work, and gender. human relations, 61: 187-211. baron, r. m., & kenny, d. a. 1986. the moderator–mediator variable distinction in social psychological research:  conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. journal of personality and social psychology, 51: 1173-1182. ballinger, g. a., & rockman, k. w. in press. chutes versus ladders: anchoring events and punctuated-equilibrium  perspective on social exchange relationships. academy of management review. beauregard, t., & henry, l. 2009. making the link between work–life balance practices and organizational perfor- mance. human resource management review, 19: 9-22. behson, s. j. 2002. which dominates? the relative importance of work–family organizational support and gen- eral organizational context on employee outcomes. journal of vocational behavior, 61: 53-72. behson, s. j. 2005. the relative contribution of formal and informal organizational work–family support. journal  of vocational behavior, 66: 487-500. bellavia, g. m., & frone, m. r. 2005. work–family conflict. in j. barling, e. k. kelloway, & m. r. frone (eds.),  handbook of work stress: 113-147. thousand oaks, ca: sage. blau, p. m. 1964. exchange and power in social life. new york: wiley. breaugh, j. a., & frye, n. k. 2008. work–family conflict: the importance of family-friendly employment prac- tices and family-supportive supervisors. journal of business and psychology, 22: 345-353. brockner, j., & wiesenfeld, b. 1996. an integrative framework for explaining reactions to decisions: interactive  effects of outcomes and procedures. psychological bulletin, 120: 189-208. camman, c., fichman, m., jenkins, d., & klesh, j. 1979. the michigan organizational effectiveness  questionnaire. unpublished manuscript, university of michigan, ann arbor. carlson, d., & perrewé, p. 1999. the role of social support in the stressor–strain relationship: an examination of  work–family conflict. journal of management, 25: 513-540. casper, w. j., eby, l. t., bordeaux, c., lockwood, a., & lambert, d. 2007. a review of research methods in io/ob  work–family research. journal of applied psychology, 92: 28-43. casper, w. j., & harris, c. m. 2008. work–life benefits and organizational attachment: self-interest utility and  signaling theory models. journal of vocational behavior, 72: 95-109. clark, s. c. 2001. work cultures and work/family balance. journal of vocational behavior, 58: 348-365. cohen, j., cohen, p., west, s. g., & aiken, l. s. 2003. applied multiple regression/correlation analysis for the  behavioral sciences (3rd ed.). hillsdale, nj: lawrence erlbaum. cook, a. 2009. connecting work–family policies to supportive work environments. group and organization  management, 34: 206-240. cropanzano, r., howes, j. c., grandey, a. a., & toth, p. 1997. the relationship of organizational politics and  support to work behaviors, attitudes, and stress. journal of organizational behavior, 18: 159-180. cropanzano, r., & mitchell, m. s. 2005. social exchange theory: an interdisciplinary review. journal of management,  31: 874-900. den dulk, l., & de ruijter, j. 2008. managing work–life policies: disruption versus dependency arguments.  explaining managerial attitudes towards employee utilization of work–life policies. international journal of  human resource management, 19: 1224-1238. dienesch, r. m., & liden, r. c. 1986. leader–member exchange model of leadership: a critique and further  development. academy of management review, 11: 618-634. eby, l. t., casper, w. j., lockwood, a., bordeaux, c., & brinley, a. 2005. work and family research in io/ob:  content analysis and review of the literature (1980-2002). journal of vocational behavior, 66: 124-197. erdogan, b., & enders, j. 2007. support from the top: supervisors’ perceived organizational support as a modera- tor of leader–member exchange to satisfaction and performance relationships. journal of applied psychology,  92: 321-330. frone, m. r. 2003. work–family balance. in j. c. quick & l. e. tetrick (eds.), handbook of occupational health  psychology: 143-162. washington, dc: american psychological association. frone, m. r., yardley, j. k., & markel, k. s. 1997. developing and testing an integrative model of the work–family  interface. journal of vocational behavior, 50: 145-167. frye, n. k., & breaugh, j. a. 2004. family-friendly policies, supervisor support, work–family conflict, family– work conflict, and satisfaction: a test of a conceptual model. journal of business and psychology, 19: 197-220. gajendran, r. s., & harrison, d. a. 2007. the good, the bad, and the unknown about telecommuting: meta-analysis  of psychological mediators and individual consequences. journal of applied psychology, 92: 1524-1541.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1148   journal of management / may 2014 gerstner, c. r., & day, d. v. 1997. meta-analytic review of leader–member exchange theory: correlates and  construct issues. journal of applied psychology, 82: 827-844. gómez, c., & rosen, b. 2001. the leader–member exchange as a link between managerial trust and employee  empowerment. group and organization management, 26: 53-69. graen, g. b., & scandura, t. a. 1987. towards the psychology of dyadic organizing. research in organizational  behavior, 9: 175-208. graen, g. b., & uhl-bien, m. 1995. relationship-based approach to leadership: development of leader–member  exchange (lmx) theory of leadership over 25 years: applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective.  leadership quarterly, 6: 219-247. hammer, l. b., kossek, e., anger, w., bodner, t., & zimmerman, k. l. 2011. clarifying work–family intervention  processes: the roles of work–family conflict and family-supportive supervisor behaviors. journal of applied  psychology, 96: 134-150. hammer, l. b., kossek, e. e., yragui, n. l., bodner, t. e., & hanson, g. c. 2009. development and validation  of a multidimensional measure of family supportive supervisor behaviors (fssb). journal of management, 35:  837-856. hammer, l. b., neal, m. b., newsom, j. t., brockwood, k. j., & colton, c. l. 2005. a longitudinal study of the  effects of dual-earner couples’ utilization of family-friendly workplace supports on work and family outcomes.  journal of applied psychology, 90: 799-810. hom, p., tsui, a., wu, j., lee, t., zhang, a., fu, p., & li, l. 2009. explaining employment relationships with  social exchange and job embeddedness. journal of applied psychology, 94: 277-297. ilies, r., nahrgang, j. d., & morgeson, f. p. 2007. leader–member exchange and citizenship behaviors: a meta- analysis. journal of applied psychology, 92: 269-277. james, l. r., mulaik, s. a., & brett, j. m. 2006. a tale of two methods. organizational research methods, 9:  233-244. kalleberg, a. l. 2008. the mismatched worker: when people don’t fit their jobs. academy of management  perspectives, 22: 24-40. kerr, s., & jermier, j. 1978. substitutes for leadership: their meaning and measurement. organizational behavior  and human performance, 22: 375-403. kossek, e. e., & lambert, s. j. 2005. work and life integration: organizational, cultural, and individual perspec- tives. mahwah, nj: lawrence erlbaum. lapierre, l. m., & allen, t. d. 2006. work-supportive family, family-supportive supervision, use of organizational  benefits, and problem-focused coping: implications for work–family conflict and employee well-being. journal  of occupational health psychology, 11: 169-181. leavy, r. l. 1983. social support and psychological disorder: a review. journal of community psychology, 11: 3-21. liden, r. c., sparrowe, r. t., & wayne, s. j. 1997. leader–member exchange theory: the past and potential for  the future. research in personnel and human resources management, 15: 47-119. lu, l., kao, s., cooper, c. l., allen, t. d., lapierre, l. m., o’driscoll, m., poelmans, s. a. y., sanchez, j. i., &  spector, p. e. 2009. work resources, work-to-family conflict, and its consequences: a taiwanese–british cross- cultural comparison. international journal of stress management, 16: 25-44. luk, d., & shaffer, m. 2005. work and family domain stressors and support: within- and cross-domain influences  on work–family conflict. journal of occupational and organizational psychology, 78: 489-508. major, d. a., & cleveland, j. n. 2007. strategies for reducing work–family conflict: applying research and best  practices from industrial and organizational psychology. in g. p. hodgkinson & j. k. ford (eds.), international  review of industrial and organizational psychology: 111-140. new york: wiley. major, d. a., fletcher, t. d., davis, d. d., & germano, l. m. 2008. the influence of work–family culture and  workplace relationships on work interference with family: a multilevel model. journal of organizational  behavior, 29: 881-987. major, d. a., & morganson, v. j. 2011. coping with work–family conflict: a leader–member exchange perspec- tive. journal of occupational health psychology, 16: 126-138. march, j. g., & simon, h. a. 1958. organizations. new york: wiley. maslyn, j., & uhl-bien, m. 2001. leader–member exchange and its dimensions: effects of self-effort and other’s  effort on relationship quality. journal of applied psychology, 86: 697-708.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


bagger, li / supervisory family support  1149 masterson, s. s., lewis, k., goldman, b. m., & taylor, m. s. 2000. integrating justice and social exchange: the  differing effects of fair procedures and treatment on work relationships. academy of management journal, 43:  738-748. mccarthy, a., darcy, c., & grady, g. 2010. work–life balance policy and practice: understanding line manager  attitudes and behaviors. human resource management review, 20: 158-167. mcmanus, k., korabik, k., rosin, h., & kelloway, e. 2002. employed mothers and the work–family interface:  does family structure matter? human relations, 55: 1295-1324. md-sidin, s., sambasivan, m., & ismail, i. 2010. relationship between work–family conflict and quality of life:  an investigation into the role of social support. journal of managerial psychology, 25: 58-81. mortimer, j. t., lorence, j., & kumka, d. s. 1986. work, family, and personality: transition to adulthood. norwood,  nj: ablex. nahrgang, j., morgeson, f., & ilies, r. 2009. the development of leader–member exchanges: exploring how per- sonality and performance influence leader and member relationships over time. organizational behavior and  human decision processes, 108: 256-266. paden, s., & buehler, c. 1995. coping with the dual-income lifestyle. journal of marriage and the family, 57:  101-110. parks, j. m., conlon, d. e., ang, s., & bontempo, r. 1999. the manager giveth, the manager taketh away:  variation in distribution/recovery rules due to resource type and cultural orientation. journal of management,  25: 723-757. podsakoff, p., mackenzie, s., ahearne, m., & bommer, w. 1995. searching for a needle in a haystack: trying to  identify the illusive moderators of leadership behaviors. journal of management, 21: 423-470. podsakoff, p., mackenzie, s., lee, j., & podsakoff, n. 2003. common method biases in behavioral research: a  critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. journal of applied psychology, 88: 879-903. preacher, k., rucker, d., & hayes, a. 2007. addressing moderated mediation hypotheses: theory, methods, and  prescriptions. multivariate behavioral research, 42: 185-227. reeve, c. l., & smith, c. s. 2000. refining lodahl and kejner’s job involvement scale with a convergent evi- dence approach: applying multiple methods to multiple samples. organizational research methods, 4: 91-111. rooney, j., & gottlieb, b. 2007. development and initial validation of a measure of supportive and unsupportive  managerial behaviors. journal of vocational behavior, 71: 186-203. rupp, d. e., & cropanzano, r. 2002. the mediating effects of social exchange relationships in predicting work- place outcomes from multifoci organizational justice. organizational behavior and human decision processes,  89: 925-946. scandura, t. a., & graen, g. b. 1984. moderating effects of initial leader–member exchange status on the effects  of a leadership intervention. journal of applied psychology, 69: 428-436. schriesheim, c. a., castro, s. l., & cogliser, c. c. 1999. leader–member exchange (lmx) research: a compre- hensive review of theory, measurement, and data-analytic practices. leadership quarterly, 10: 63-113. schyns, b., kroon, b., & moors, g. 2008. follower characteristics and the perception of leader–member exchange.  journal of managerial psychology, 23: 772-788. sin, h., nahrgang, j. d., & morgeson, f. p. 2009. understanding why they don’t see eye to eye: an examination  of leader–member exchange (lmx) agreement. journal of applied psychology, 94: 1048-1057. smith, c. s., tisak, j., hahn, s. e., & schmieder, r. a. 1997. the measurement of job control. journal of  organizational behavior, 18: 225-237. smith, c. s., tisak, j., & schmieder, r. a. 1993. the measurement properties of the role conflict and role ambigu- ity scales: a review and extension of the empirical research. journal of organizational behavior, 14: 37-48. sobel, m. e. 1982. asymptotic confidence intervals for indirect effects in structural equation models. in s. leinhardt  (ed.), sociological methodology: 290-312. washington, dc: american sociological association. sparrowe, r. t. & liden, r. c. 1997. process and structure in leader–member exchange. academy of management  review, 22: 522-552. taylor, b., delcampo, r., & blancero, d. 2009. work–family conflict/facilitation and the role of workplace supports  for u.s. hispanic professionals. journal of organizational behavior, 30: 643-664. thomas, l. t., & ganster, d. c. 1995. impact of family-supportive work variables on work–family conflict and  strain: a control perspective. journal of applied psychology, 80: 6-15.  at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 


1150   journal of management / may 2014 thompson, c. a., beauvais, l. l., & lyness, k. s. 1999. when work–family benefits are not enough: the influence  of work–family culture on benefit utilization, organizational attachment, and work–family conflict. journal of  vocational behavior, 54: 392-415. thompson, c. a., jahn, e., kopelman, r., & prottas, d. 2004. perceived organizational family support: a longitu- dinal and multilevel analysis. journal of managerial issues, 16: 454-565. thompson, c. a., & prottas, d. j. 2006. relationships among organizational family support, job autonomy, per- ceived control, and employee well-being. journal of occupational health psychology, 11: 100-118. venkataramani, v., green, s. g., & schleicher, d. j. 2010. well-connected leaders: the impact of leaders’ social  network ties on lmx and members’ work attitudes. journal of applied psychology, 95: 1071-1084. wang, h., law, k., hackett, r., wang, d., & chen, z. 2005. leader–member exchange as a mediator of the relation- ship between transformational leadership and followers’ performance and organizational citizenship behavior.  academy of management journal, 48: 420-432. wayne, s. j., shore, l. m., bommer, w. h., & tetrick, l. e. 2002. the role of fair treatment and rewards in percep- tions of organizational support and leader–member exchange. journal of applied psychology, 87: 590-598. wells, s. j. 2007. are you too family friendly? hr magazine, 52: 35-39. williams, l., & anderson, s. 1991. job satisfaction and organizational commitment as predictors of organizational  citizenship and in-role behaviors. journal of management, 17: 601-617. wilson, k., sin, h., & conlon, d. 2010. what about the leader in leader–member exchange? the impact of resource  exchanges and substitutability on the leader. academy of management review, 35: 358-372.   at uzh hauptbibliothek / zentralbibliothek z?rich on november 3, 2016jom.sagepub.comdownloaded from 
