

  the many faces of facebook: experiencing social media  as performance, exhibition, and personal archive  xuan zhao, niloufar salehi, sasha naranjit, sara alwaalan, stephen voida, dan cosley  information science, cornell university  301 college ave., ithaca, ny, 14850  {xz298, ns685, shn22, sa782, svoida, drc44}@cornell.edu      abstract  the growing use of social media means that an increasing  amount of people’s lives are visible online. we draw from  goffman’s theatrical metaphor and hogan’s exhibition ap- proach to explore how people manage their personal collec- tion of social media data over time. we conducted a quali- tative study of 13 participants to reveal their day-to-day  decision-making about producing and curating digital traces  on facebook. their goals and strategies showed that people  experience the facebook platform as consisting of three  different functional regions: a performance region for man- aging recent data and impression management, an exhibi- tion region for longer term presentation of self-image, and a  personal region for archiving meaningful facets of life.  further, users’ need for presenting and archiving data in  these three regions is mediated by temporality. these find- ings trigger a discussion of how to design social media that  support these dynamic and sometimes conflicting needs.  author keywords  reminiscing; personal archives; curation; identity; exhibition  acm classification keywords  h.5.m. [information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,  hci)]: miscellaneous.   introduction  hundreds of millions of users are generating digital traces  of their daily lives in social media. social media serve  many purposes, the most salient of which relate to their  original functions of communication and social connected- ness. research around these platforms has focused on is- sues that arise in the context of social interaction, such as  how these systems support identity presentation [5, 16] and  how they help people build social capital [6]. these studies  generally conceptualize social media as a platform for con- text-specific, selective “performance,” following goffman’s  theatrical “front stage/back stage” metaphor for impression  management and the enactment of social roles [7].  a more recent metaphor extends goffman, arguing that  social media’s reviewability and searchability lend social  media the feeling of an art exhibition in a museum [11]. in  this metaphor, performances leave behind digital traces that  act as digital artifacts of the performance, and the accumu- lation and collection of these artifacts causes these spaces to  take on the character of a long-term identity “exhibition,”  rather than that of an ephemeral performance.  the value of these exhibitions is not limited to others.  much of the content that people create in social media has  personal meaning [4], and the emerging personal value of  content in these media has been explored in recent studies  [15, 25, 29]. thus, despite these systems’ focus on social  purposes, it is fair to say that “today there is an increasing  desire to use online social media as a way for archiving life  experiences and reflecting on identities” [9, p15].   these shifts and emerging goals triggered us to rethink the  nature of social platforms, the curation of data that they  afford, and the ways that individual users conceptualize and  experience social media and the data they create in them.   both the archive and the exhibition metaphors point to the  importance of the past in social media. however, except for  recent work around reminiscing [29], reflection [33], and  digital possessions [27], there has been little study of how  people make decisions about their past content. likewise,  little is known about how the performance, exhibition, and  archiving perspectives coexist. as we move into a world  where one’s digital traces express more of who we are, it is  important to learn and design around not only how and why  people produce digital traces, but also how and why they  take care of this data, and how the relationship between  users and their data might change over time.  to address these questions, we conducted a study of 13  active, long-term facebook users about their day-to-day  experience of creating and managing facebook data. their  responses indicate a complex, dynamic relationship be- tween people and their data, in which the combination of  concerns and goals that people have and the tools the plat- form provides fall into three broad “regions” that roughly  align with the perspectives described above: a performance  region, an exhibition region, and a personal region. by  “region” here, we mean a set of goals, concerns, contexts,  and corresponding system features.  as we shall argue, these three regions have both spatial and  temporal aspects, with both elements of the interface and  elements that depend on the recency of content and duration    permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for   personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are   not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies  bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise,   or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior   specific permission and/or a fee.  chi’13, april 27 – may 2, 2013, paris, france.  copyright © 2013 acm  978-1-4503-1899-0/13/04...$15.00.    session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 1


  of goals helping to define them. we identify the implica- tions of these regions in social media systems, particularly  in the tensions and opposing needs people experience as  they manage their facebook data. finally, we discuss how  thinking about these regions and the ways current platforms  support them suggest metaphors that might drive designs  that better support all three regions together.  related work  “the moving finger writes; and, having writ,  moves on: nor all thy piety nor wit  shall lure it back to cancel half a line,  nor all thy tears wash out a word of it.”  —omar khayyam  translated by edward fitzgerald  we explore the complexity of social media from two per- spectives: as a space that extends in time and as a space that  serves both public and personal purposes.   an identity platform that extends in time  goffman’s notion of selective self-presentation [7] is wide- ly used in studies that examine how people interact with  each other in online spaces, for example, work that focuses  on impression management [1, 3] and privacy management  [32, 34]. in his dramaturgical approach, goffman conceptu- alizes the “front stage” as where a performance is given in  presence of an audience. people often need to selectively  present themselves in order to meet social expectations and  cultural values. in comparison, the “back stage” is a place  where only the performer exists, without the audience and  where other aspects of personal identity might be revealed.  this metaphor maps well onto salient elements of social  media. it matches well with the fact that behaviors in social  media are socially embedded and observed, activating con- cerns about others’ expectations. the metaphor also empha- sizes present action: “the moving finger writes; and hav- ing writ, moves on.” most social media systems emphasize  the present, featuring recent content and burying the past  both to support goals such as awareness of friends [13] and  to draw repeat visitors with fresh content [26].  the past, however, does not have to be buried, as illustrated  by facebook’s own timeline interface (figure 1). timeline  explicitly organizes a person’s content around a linear time- line that supports browsing far into the past, including links  directly to activity that happened years ago. this makes the  past much more salient than in pre-timeline versions of the  interface, where past status updates and wall posts were  available, but required tedious paging through a list; and  past photos were available, but organized in albums rather  than as a temporal stream.  hogan’s exhibition metaphor calls attention to these past  data [11]. he conceptualizes social media as a storehouse,  where users submit their personal data, and the system acts  as an invisible curator who manages, redistributes, and se- lectively displays content for audiences who have access to  the user’s data. systems provide users with limited control:     figure 1: facebook’s timeline interface and the time links  (see inset) that provide rapid access to past content.  “nor all thy piety nor wit shall lure it back to cancel half a  line” resonates with the feeling that many people have  when trying to manage privacy settings. hogan emphasizes  that “performance” is closely associated with a specific  “time-space-identity-locus”, but that once the data associat- ed with a performance are recorded, they become artifacts  that others will view at different times and contexts. there- fore, social media data are used more for asynchronous  exhibitions than synchronous performances.   most current research either studies users’ activity and mo- tivations for using social media as a snapshot in time [13,  22] or their collective usage patterns over time [8, 17]. ho- gan’s approach emphasizes the need to think about the rela- tionship between individuals and their data over time. giv- en the persistence of social media data, it becomes interest- ing to consider how notions of performance and exhibition  manifest on the same platform. in particular, there is an  uneasy relationship between people and their past data  when the data becomes detached from their original con- text. for example, wang et al.’s descriptive taxonomy to- wards facebook regret behaviors [35] begs a deeper discus- sion of why people regret, and take explicit management  efforts such as deleting, detagging, and unfriending.   an identity platform for the self  both the performance and exhibition perspectives frame  social media behavior from an outward-facing, public per- spective. this framing is natural given the social nature of  these media, but the emerging practice of using social me- dia for personal archiving [9] leads us to consider whether  the self has also become an important audience. one con- ceptualization of these data is the notion of “digital posses- sions” that carry and display meaningful events, places, and  people for both the self and others to view [21, 27].   a second line of work explores how social media data trac- es can mediate and support reflection processes. these trac- es appear in many media: e-mail [10], text chat [36], and  social media including flickr, picasa, last.fm, twitter, blog- ger, and facebook [29]. on balance, this work has focused  session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 2


  on individual sensemaking and use, although there has been  some attention to supporting relationships and family using  both digital traces and physical possessions [30, 31] and  studying how people use digital content to think about and  enact their friendships [33] and romantic relationships [37].  information generated and owned by others can play an  important role in this meaning-making process [33], alt- hough issues around third-party ownership can make the  management and curation of these data difficult [27].  this research suggests that digital traces left in social media  contain great potential for stimulating and supporting self- reflection and reminiscing activities. both the intentional  use of social media as a “life logging” tool and the potential  usefulness of digital traces for memory and reflection high- light the importance of understanding how people balance  the public functions and personal value of social media. for  instance, the unwritten rule limiting public displays of af- fection in facebook might prevent people from recording as  much about relationships as they would like, while changes  in a relationship might cause content previously important  for public affirmation to become instead a source of pain  [37]: “nor all thy tears wash out a word of it.”  study design  our study aims to explore how practices of online presenta- tion, exhibition, and archiving are intertwined; how needs  for different activities contrast or align with each other; and  how designs might help to balance, support, and enrich the- se practices. we approach this problem by investigating  how and why people manage their facebook data. we seek  to provide a deep understanding of how aforementioned  theories manifest in the interaction between users and their  own data, to identify how these perspectives are relevant to  social media systems, and to discuss implications for de- signing systems that support these practices.  research context and data collection  on december 22, 2011, facebook launched timeline. as  described earlier, this user interface makes past data more  salient for both the user and members of their social net- work, highlighting a number of the issues in which we are  interested related both to temporality and the tension be- tween public and personal goals. now a standard part of the  interface, timeline was originally opt-in and adoption was  slow, allowing us to sample a set of users as they began to  use the interface and grapple with these issues.  we conducted our study in may and june of 2012, around  six months after the new interface was launched. to try to  improve the diversity of our sample, we used facebook  advertising to recruit participants. the ad was targeted at  facebook users living in our local community (a small city  in the northeastern united states) to facilitate bringing par- ticipants to our lab for an interview. we also targeted peo- ple who had used facebook for several years and had gen- erated a significant amount of social media content. partici- pants were compensated with $15 in cash.  a total of 13 people (9 female, 4 male; 8 white/caucasian,  2 asian, 2 hispanic/latino, 1 american indian/alaskan  native; aged 18 to 43, m = 22) with an average of 4.3 years  of facebook activity completed the study. participants first  completed a pre-survey with questions about their face- book use and demographics. seven of our participants had  already installed timeline at the time of the study, while the  others were instructed to adopt it after completing the pre- survey to capture their initial reactions to the interface.  each participant then completed a daily online diary for two  weeks about aspects of facebook use related to data crea- tion, curation, and sensemaking around digital traces— questions derived from the theoretical perspectives above.  we asked them to record whether they had updated or  changed their profiles by adding a new post, changing pri- vacy settings, and so on; whether they had reviewed their  own or others’ past content; and whether they had managed  past content of any sort. the daily diary allowed us to rec- ord actions and reactions close to when they happened and  provided us with examples to reference during interviews.  we reminded participants about the diary via daily e-mails.  after two weeks, participants came to our lab for a one- hour interview. we asked them to log in to their facebook  account and to review their profiles during the interview,  both to reflect on their experience and to enrich their re- sponses. we asked general questions about their overall  facebook usage and privacy attitudes, in order to encourage  them to reflect on the kind of management behaviors in  which they engage. we specifically asked about their face- book activity from a temporal perspective, such as how they  felt about their past content and how they valued it, in order  to understand what facebook data means to them, as well  as if, when, and why they take explicit action to manage it.  other questions included how and why they view others’  past content and their attitude toward timeline after having  used it. we also encouraged them to talk about offline ar- chiving experiences such as journaling and their experience  with other social tools (such as flickr and twitter) and to  compare these experiences with their use of facebook.  data analysis  to develop a holistic understanding of participants’ use of  facebook, we included data from both diary entries and  interviews in our analysis. we conducted a collaborative,  inductive analysis process.   in the first analytic phase, four researchers met togeth- er face-to-face and used open coding to develop a set of  primary categories and, subsequently, subcategories to help  organize our initial insights. our primary categories includ- ed themes such as real-time decision-making of facebook  activities (resonant with goffman [7]), management behav- iors (resonant with hogan [11]), browsing behaviors, and  general use of facebook. through continued, itera- tive analysis, we identified subcategories of these themes,  for example, within “management behaviors” we identified  descriptions of behaviors, motivations for managing, and  session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 3


  strategies for managing. by the end of this first phase  of analysis, we had established a high-level agreement upon  and common ground for organizing, discussing, and inter- preting the data. in phase two, we used tams analyzer to  map all interviewees’ statements onto our categories and  subcategories. each of the four researchers independent- ly reviewed half of the transcripts, such that all data were  examined by two researchers1. the goal of this categoriza- tion phase was to sort the data so that we  could easily review related data together in the third phase  of our analysis. in the third analytic phase, we conducted a  series of face-to-face meetings in which we used concept  charting [19] to expand on and refine our understanding of  the interrelationships among the themes that we had previ- ously identified. in this phase of the analysis, we further  unpacked our data to arrive at two main themes. the first is  the idea that although facebook is a single platform, it pro- vides multiple regions of activity including performance,  exhibition and personal regions. the second is the key role  of temporality in how transitions between and tensions  among these regions occur.  below, we present these themes using representative quotes  from participants and discuss how future designs might  better account for the multiple regions of facebook  by providing appropriate curation tools and metaphors.  one platform, multiple regions  our data provide strong evidence that people do, in fact,  experience facebook from the analytical perspectives iden- tified earlier, around the performance and exhibition re- gions (“public regions”) and the personal region. in this  section, we explore the shape of these regions, as well as  the tensions and opposing needs people experience as they  manage their facebook profiles across multiple regions.  performance region: creating content   consistent with goffman [7], the performance region is  where users make decisions about creating and managing  content for current self-presentation needs. the content is  usually targeted to, or associated with contexts and audi- ences relevant to the moment.   (there is) a video posted by my girlfriend that was re- lated to a phone conversation we were having. (p2)  i updated my status to show team support for a big meet.  (p18)  decisions made in the performance region also include who  people decide to be friends with, with context influencing  their behaviors as well, making “friending” another sort of  performance act.                                                                1 we do not report inter-coder reliability; as argued by armstrong  et al. [1], reliability measures are most useful when the coding  breakdown is the primary output of analysis. when the codes are a  first step toward further interpretation, measures like kappa give  little information about the quality of the analysis.  [i friended him] because he was at camp with me so after  camp i guess i just got friend requests from people there  or friended people who were there … (p16)   [i friended them] just to be friendly. like, it’s just kind of  rude [not responding] if someone is friending you … if i  really dislike somebody, i won’t accept it. but if they’re a  nice person and maybe have something interesting to say,  i’ll—i'll accept it. (p9)  constraints in the performance region change over time,  and participants leverage features such as profile pictures to  customize their self-presentation for specific situations:  i changed my timeline cover, because the soccer game  barcelona vs. chelsea is coming up soon and i want  to show my support to barcelona. (p2)  the fact that both the old facebook profile page and the  new timeline interface prioritize content based on recency  ensures that context-relevant performance is positioned for  maximum exposure, both in the flow of updates on one’s  profile page and in others’ news feeds. in general, the per- formance region is closely associated with a time-space  locus that focuses on current activity and current goals:  yeah. i mean overall i’d say i am [conscious about  how my page appeared to other people]. but i think it  more so applies to like my current content. (p6)  exhibition region: managing content  due to the persistence of social media data, content initially  bounded by a specific time-space locus gradually goes into  the exhibition region, modeled after hogan [11]. for the  most part, this region focuses on past data and longer-term  needs around constructing identity. however, while ho- gan’s discussion of exhibition focuses on the system’s role  in data curation [11], our results show that users, too, wish  to play an active role in curating data in this region.   participants were not always concerned about the past, but  when they were, they encountered decision-making chal- lenges regarding the changing contexts and the appropriate- ness of the content on their profiles. these challenges  sometime resulted in an explicit competition between the  performance and the exhibition region that drove manage- ment behaviors. we define management here as a conscious  behavior for evaluating personal profiles or tweaking one’s  public presentation in social media over time.   the concept of management hints at a conscious effort,  consistent with how previous literature defines personal  information management as a practice that involves main- taining, organizing, retrieving, and redistributing personal  information for task-related purposes [14]. it was common  for people to express concerns about past data that was  emotional, hard to interpret, inappropriate for their self im- age, or irrelevant to themself or others.   managing emotional content. emotional or self-expressive  content was frequently mentioned as the content needing  session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 4


  the most attention. at the time of performance, this content  might have been quite useful: “i was so frustrated at the  time, posting a status about it was a slight relief from the  situation” (p6), but it became undesirable, or subject to  misinterpretation, out of context: “because i thought my  status may have come off as a bit whiney or condescend- ing…” (p6). this finding is consistent with prior work that  looks at tactics for self-presentation in face-to-face situa- tions [18] and experiences of regret in social media [35].   one aspect of context that came up often as a trigger for  managing emotional content was how others might interpret  a given post:  i was in a certain mood right then and i posted some- thing … i went back and read it i realized that people  probably wouldn’t take it sarcastically. that’s so hard  about communicating online, is people can’t tell …  your emotion behind stuff. (p12)  managing overall self-image. when people take a critical  eye towards their facebook profiles, they are usually con- cerned about whether the content still promotes or adds to  their overall self-image. over half of participants mentioned  that they have deleted content that is related to a specific  event or a specific conversation but does not have value for  long-term exhibition of the self:  i would delete it, yes, like after the event happens it’s  like really useless. it doesn’t add onto my life or my  timeline. i try to keep it clean. (p2)  these concerns would also trigger based on participants’  desire to control how much they revealed about themselves:  i’m an organized person and like things to be more  concise and … i want to limit how much i’m showing  people about my life at a time. (p10)  about one-third of participants also mentioned their con- cern towards old content, which seemed to be appropriate,  “cool,” or “funny” at the moment but became undesirable  as people’s values changed over time:  i had an [photo] album in … 2007 … i thought it was  cool…and two years later i was looking at it and it  embarrassed me so much that i deleted some of the  pictures. (p3)  managing relevance. for most participants, it was im- portant to keep data on their profile relevant, both in the  sense of content and temporal relevance. more than half of  the participants actively manage recent content “…just to  kind of keep it relevant” (p7) to their current life. people  would delete bits of information about having read articles,  or listening to music, even if “it’s not hurting anything. it’s  just kinda cluttering what’s there” (p12).  most participants also recognized that recent content was  most likely to get attention from others, leading manage- ment activities to focus on recent content:  [i manage] just the most recent stuff because i assume  that most people don’t have the time or patience or  desire to go back further than that. (p5)  managing friends. besides content that expires in time,  people also treat the relationship of being a facebook friend  as a dynamic concept. they frequently adjust their friend  list to make sure that people who have access to their pro- files are appropriate audiences for their long-term exhibi- tion. in particular, they were sometimes motivated to con- trol others’ access to their information:  sometimes i would friend people for like a specific  purpose like i’m working with them on a project …  but like afterwards do i need to have them see all my  information all the time. (p6)  the other major reason for removing friendships was rela- tionship change:  after a really horrible suite/living situation with now  ex-friends, i did end up deleting, blocking, and chang- ing the privacy settings on my facebook because i felt  that they could find out things about my day, my  schedule, my emotions, by reading my facebook if we  remained friends and i wanted nothing to do with  them anymore. (p11)  friend list management corresponds closely with hogan’s  observation that once a performance becomes recorded, the  content submitter (user) may have little control over how  their content will be consumed by others who have access  to the exhibition. the ability to delete friends seems to be  one common strategy that people use for transitioning con- tent into the exhibition region.  personal region: curating content for the long-term  when participants responded to our questions about how  and why they manage their profiles, exhibiting their image  to the public was not the only concern. almost all partici- pants noted that facebook has significant personal value,  serving as a “personal locker” on the internet that archives  their personal and social memories.   we define the personal region as the place where users  perceive or manage their facebook data around a perceived  personal value such as reminiscing and reflecting, as op- posed to traditionally rendered public values such as self- presentation to others. this region is also focused on the  past, and on features that promote archival storage:  because i don’t keep everything on e-mail or on my  computer or written down someplace. so a lot of times  facebook is the way that i remember stuff … and i  like to go back and see how … my silly friends and i  were, back in the day. (p12)  whether or not they frequently use facebook as a reminisc- ing tool, participants found this archival space to be reassur- ing: “i mean i actually like having the past stuff, not that i  session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 5


  frequently look at it but if i ever do want to reminisce some- thing … it’s cool that it’s there” (p3).  on balance, most participants preferred to have a record of  “everything” happening on facebook, negative or positive,  even in the case of difficult relationship endings:  i’m not friends with a lot of people that i was friends  with years ago. and sometimes it ended really badly  … but sometimes i get nostalgic, i go back and i smile  and i remember and it makes me feel really warm sort  of like comforting to know that stuff happened and re- flect upon it. (p5)  decisions about whether to archive or access specific con- tent, however, might change over time:  so like at least for me, i’m now best friends with my  previous boyfriend, so there would be no reason to de- lete these pictures. i think though i remember at the  time untagging myself in pictures and then ended up  retagging myself … i was angry when we broke up …  but then i went back and retagged some of them be- cause i liked the picture. (p6)  tensions between public and personal regions  the fact that facebook is designed primarily to support  social and public activity raises tensions between the public  and personal regions. people do struggle to balance what is  desirable for public display and what they want to keep for  personal archival, sometimes facing the “ongoing tug of  war” (p5) to sacrifice one or the other:  i look weird in that picture … oh my goodness. i don’t  like it at all but i don’t know if i would delete it be- cause i like having that memory. (p6)  photos are seen as being especially valuable in the personal  region. however, photos also have a significant public  component as well, since people are often tagged in one  another’s photos. people who value this collection or are  used to claiming the ownership of photos in this way face  more of a psychological burden when they don’t think that  the photo is publicly desirable:  i’ve had people post photos of me and be like wow this  is a bad photo. but i mean … if i untagged all the pho- tos that were bad i would have no photos at all. (p7)  however, untagging yourself from a photo removes your  access to it, and, as with deleting content, can lead to regret:  i tend to delete, untag myself off of a lot of pictures,  and sometimes i think it’s a mistake because then af- terwards when i want to look back i’m not going to  have that much to look back on … but, anyway, i still  like to just keep the things i think are relevant (on fa- cebook) even though it’s probably a mistake. (p2)  one way that people deal with this tension in ways that  minimize regret is by using timeline features that provide  more control over the exhibition region. the most frequent- ly used such feature is “hiding” content, which prevents it  from appearing on the timeline but leaves it accessible  from elsewhere, such as albums:  i rarely un-tag photos that i don’t like of myself but  i’ll hide it from my timeline, it’s like i don’t need that  to be like the first thing anyone sees when they’re on  my page. but i do like to keep them just because like  most of them are nice memories. (p6)  leaving tagged pictures “awaiting approval” of the tag is  another way to keep photos without exhibiting them:  i leave it in the approval section, like where you have  to click yes or no … i don’t delete it because it’s kind  of nice to remember the stupid, funny nights ... (p4)  the personal region seems to be more tolerant than public  regions, in that most people prefer to have a record of all  that’s happening on facebook—negative, positive or in- formative—versus the need to be vigilantly selective about  content visible to the public. however, this raises important  questions around how facebook might better support the  personal region, since content normally must first pass  through the public performance region unless people take  special care to use non-default privacy controls.  temporal transitions between regions  this brings us to our second major theme, which highlights  the important role that temporality plays in mediating  among these regions, one reason that we define regions as  having both a spatial and temporal component.  between performance and exhibition regions  as content moves from performance to exhibition regions,  people are faced with the need to re-evaluate and re-select  content. temporal relevance serves not only as one im- portant factor that people consider when managing their  profiles, but also as an important boundary for separating  performance and exhibition regions. participants tended to  perceive their “recent” content (in contrast to their “former”  content) as providing a more accurate representation of self,  reflecting who they are right now and what they’re up to.  as specific performances “expire” in time, needs for man- aging content, such as deleting, might arise.  participants commonly talked of content that was relevant,  recent, current, and past, highlighting the importance of  temporality. in general, they tied the notion of recent con- tent to the front page of their profiles; however, they had  widely varying perceptions of what counted as “recent.”  some participants perceived recent content as being com- prised of a day’s worth of content, while others felt it might  include up to a month or a year. the closest commonality  we found was that there was broad agreement that recent  content would help people catch up on one’s life, and tend- ed to represent current aspects of the self well:  i think when i look at my page it’s like … like wow,  this is what katherine’s been up to lately, like okay  session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 6


  like that’s what she looks like, pretty background …  she got into [university name]. (p10)  the notion that current facebook content represents the self  well is closely tied to the notion that the “big events” in  their lives are documented on facebook, such that an audi- ence can easily catch up with a person’s present state:  i mean, obviously, there’s more to my life than just  what you see on the facebook, but as far as like big  events happening, like getting into [university] and  like running that race and ... those are just some big  things that have been happening … (p10)  big events also served to make the transitions between per- formance and exhibition regions salient, when people faced  meaningful life events or turning points. for example, rela- tionship changes, “applying for a job” (p2), and graduation  were all commonly mentioned as triggers:  then we got into a really bad spat and then, like, it  was just getting, like, kind of nasty about it. so, like, i  just took them [friends] off facebook. (p4)  it usually depends on sort of what jobs i’m looking for  or what internships and it’s whether that’s like chang- ing the profile picture to be more professional or just  having it be like slightly more casual. (p1)  other than that, facebook content management tasks were a  more sporadic activity that people undertook when they  “have a lot of time to kill” (p5).   between public and personal regions  temporality also plays an important role in mediating be- tween the public and personal regions. we found that as  social media data “expires” from the public’s attention, it  also gradually transitions into a personal space where it is  mostly seen as an archive of meaningful memories.  part of this idea of content expiration comes from a per- ceived norm that public attention only focuses on recent  content. participants predominantly felt that if they are not  viewing the past content of others, then no one else is view- ing their past content, either: “most people don’t have the  time or patience or desire to go back further” (p5). when  personal content exceeds its “shelf life,” it crosses over into  an awkward state that users perceive as “implicitly private.”  people expressed discomfort when others accessed their old  data: “i think it’s weird when people comment on my old  stuff because you can sort of tell that they’re digging” (p1).  participants also felt that they were invading others’ privacy  when accessing old data, even for short definitions of “old”:  it would be weird, like if i came down and i like …  even like to a week ago it would be weird if i like now  commented. (p6)  because it means that you’re like digging through  their profile and sometimes that’s … i don’t know, i  mean, because it’s like referred to as creeping on  someone—in a nice way—but if i go through old pho- tos i usually wouldn’t comment on them. (p7)  although the archive is not necessarily seen as appropriate  for others, it has value to the self:  i think it’s good to have [an archive], if not for some- one else, for myself. because i don’t keep everything  on e-mail or on my computer or written down some- place. so a lot of times, facebook is the way that i  remember stuff … i want to be able to go back … i do  like that. (p12)  timeline creates and alleviates temporal tensions  timeline also provides a nice case in point about how inter- faces can interact with these temporal tensions. as shown in  figure 1, the interface provides a kind of temporal data  segmentation. content generated around years and months  are gathered and arranged within sections of one’s time- line, and access points are provided on the front page.  this design both creates and alleviates tensions among dif- ferent functional regions. on one hand, the easy access to  old data led many participants to engage in significant man- agement of their facebook content because the sudden  availability of older content blurred the lines between per- formance and exhibition: “when i first got timeline, it was  showing me like all the stuff from the past. i hid things that  i was like, people don’t need to know about that” (p5).  however, other participants felt that attaching timestamps  to data helped to resolve the “temporal context collapse”  between performance and exhibition regions:  timeline does kind of embrace your history … maybe  it’s the ambiguity [of the old profile] that makes me  want to just delete it just to have the current and rele- vant stuff … but i guess with timeline it’s like—oh,  okay—you see these pictures, but they are from 2008.  (p10)  designing for the many faces of facebook  these tensions highlight the uneasy coexistence of these  multiple regions in a single platform. facebook supports  some goals (mostly social) and some curation strategies  well, but its support for user curation and the personal re- gion are not strong and often run afoul of users’ needs.   here, we discuss the sometimes-uneasy relationship be- tween the system and users curating together, along with  the need for better designs and more effective metaphors  for supporting dynamic needs and multiple regions emerg- ing from the same “overloaded” platform.   who curates, and how?  hogan’s discussion of past data emphasizes the role of the  system as content curator [11]. our study points to a more  complex story, including the user’s role in curation and the  various strategies that the system and its users engage in,  alone and collaboratively, to manage performance, exhibi- tion, and personal archiving. some decisions, such as the  format of timeline or the algorithms used to filter content,  session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 7


  are executed by the system unilaterally. users also have  some unilateral choices, particularly around the decision  about whether or not to post content in the first place.  after the creation of content, users’ ability to curate their  data and exert control over how they will be exhibited is  both empowered and limited by system features, such as the  ability to delete content, to create sharing and privacy poli- cies, to manage friend lists, and so on. in observing users’  active role in curating their content, we found that some  system features effectively supported their curation needs.  for example, hiding content and delaying approval of tags  were both used to accomplish high-level goals around con- trolling the exhibition of data.  at other times, however, the tools don’t align with people’s  needs or mental models. for example, although facebook  provides privacy settings that support personal use, it pro- vides no obvious personal spaces for private reflection and  meaning making around this personal content:  i notice i have a few things that are private only to me  but like they’re not separate in any way. they’re not  like special, “oh, these are only for me …”. (p10)  lack of visibility about how the system curator works can  also confuse people [12], resulting in distrust and defensive  behaviors. one example of users trying, but failing, to em- brace system curation tools is in the use of privacy settings.  all participants in our study used facebook’s privacy set- tings, such as only allowing friends to view their profiles.  however, there is confusion about how effective these con- trols actually are, resulting in people relying on—but not  always fully trusting—the system:   we were young enough when it (facebook) went pub- lic that we saw kind of a year or two before us getting  really scrutinized heavily by future employers and i  know there’s all sorts of workarounds on facebook  that they can use to hack in and see your stuff so i  don’t really trust facebook’s privacy settings. (p1)  likewise, although one-third of participants actively used  the ability to hide timeline content to manage tensions be- tween public and personal regions, a similar number didn’t  understand how this mechanism might support their use of  this hidden data because the interface didn’t make clear  what would happen or how to access it:  so, in terms of hiding things (from timeline), like, for  me, if i hid it, it’s gone because … i don’t know … i  don’t even know how i would get that back … so hid- ing and deleting is kinda the same thing. (p6)  another problem arises when curation is too costly. con- sistent with previous work [20], audience segmentation is  seen as being useful for managing information inflow, but  is too hard to use to control one’s own sharing:  if i could wave a wand and just say only my writer  friends, then that would be … i might do that, but it’s  just such a … it would be such a pain to sort every- body and to think about that every time. (p9)  finally, goals for curating personal data feel awkward in the  social context of facebook. though in principle it supports  self-archiving through its privacy settings, this feels unnatu- ral in the current platform:  i notice when i created my most recent album that it  was … only visible to me and i was like, well, if it was  only visible to me, why would i put it on facebook be- cause i would just keep it on my computer. (p7)  these aspects of features, models, cost, and norms around  curation highlight the need to think about how system cura- tion decisions and tools affect users’ behavior and norms.  when we step back and think about facebook’s curation  policies, the most salient is based on temporality. facebook,  like most other social media platforms, arranges content  around the time that it is created, resulting in recent content  being prioritized while earlier content flows backwards into  one’s online identity exhibition. on that note, even though  no participants explicitly commented about it, we wonder to  what extent this taken-for-granted system curation policy  has shaped users’ perceptions, such as perceiving the face- book norm as “going forward,” and their behaviors, such as  how they tend to manage temporally adjacent content in  timeline. this possibility raises interesting issues about the  role of personal data on a public platform, and has im- portant design implications for future interfaces.   metaphors matter  our findings about different functional regions of social  media, and the corresponding metaphors of performance,  exhibition, and personal locker, lead us to revisit how we  should design social media as an identity platform for both  context-specific performance and long-term exhibition, for  both others and self.  one can argue that facebook actually does well compared  to many other social media. it serves performance well  through the newsfeed and exhibition fairly well through  timeline, and also provides some features for personal  spaces, such as the privacy option “visible for me”. many  other interfaces focus only on one region: twitter and  google buzz, for instance, provide functionality mainly  supporting performance; pinterest is largely about exhibi- tion; and flickr and path are largely tools for archiving. all  of these could, in principle, serve multiple goals: in flickr,  people can perform for those who follow their photo  stream, and exhibit to at least some extent through the al- bum mechanism. likewise, pinterest could, in principle,  support collections of past data for both personal sensemak- ing and exhibition to others, although its normal use as an  exhibit of one’s tastes and desires is so strong that it may be  hard for these other uses to gain footing.  there are arguments to be made for the use of separate plat- forms for separate purposes and for not trying to be “all  things to all people.” but, in practice, people do use social  session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 8


  media for multiple purposes, and designs should respect  that. inviting people to upload their personal histories to  timeline may align with mark zuckerberg’s beliefs in the  value of “radical transparency.” but the timeline metaphor  and its affordances that favor public exhibition are a bad  match for most people’s goals in archiving personal data.  careful attention to how people might wish to use the data  that social media increasingly capture will lead to designs  that better serve people’s needs and respect their wishes.   one way to mitigate these tensions and improve social me- dia platforms’ ability to support multiple regions is to think  about how system curation could become “smarter” or  “more considerate” when managing one’s digital traces.  the way temporality mediates content between public and  personal regions raises the possibility of designing a “two- sided” system, where content that falls out of the public  attention will be automatically moved into a private space  designed for personal archival. instead of being implicitly  private, these data would become explicitly personal. there  is much value in systems that forget after a while, and even  in systems that help us in our own forgetting [23]. howev- er, our users’ re-visitation of old content and regret around  decisions to delete it suggest that actual deletion of data is  not to be taken lightly.  another, more extended metaphor, is inspired by work from  miller et al. on the relationship between people’s identity  and personally owned artifacts [24]. we wonder if drawing  on people’s practices for displaying physical artifacts  around their houses might be a useful tool for thinking  about social media design, somewhat like odom et al.’s  exploration of how people manage virtual processions rela- tive to the ways that they arrange physical space [28].  if we conceptualize one’s facebook data as a collection of  artifacts displayed in one’s house, physical places where  people traditionally display artifacts could have strong con- notations for supporting the multiple regions. pictures on  the wall might function to display one’s long-term identity  exhibition, not unlike the way that one’s basic information  on facebook is always explicitly displayed and easy to ac- cess. grouped pictures in frames might serve to organize  specific facets of people’s identity or highlight meaningful  groups of friends or family. stickers or drawings on the  refrigerator might represent items that are temporarily im- portant but are replaced or augmented with new content  over time, not unlike how one’s profile photos and cover  photos are currently used. pictures put on the bedroom table  might have significant personal meanings that only trusted  others can access, somewhat like “implicitly private” face- book content. a diary locked in a drawer might be strictly  personal and private, such as the personal archival space  that some of our participants expressed interest in having as  a part of the platform. then, the system might provide tools  that help people move, arrange, and tell stories about data  among these display spaces.  note that we are not arguing that facebook should be, liter- ally, a house or a neighborhood or some other physical  space, although systems like second life and lambdamoo  have had some success using these metaphors literally. we  are, however, proposing that metaphors that call attention to  the multiplicity of regions, transitions, and curation needs  of social media users might have real value above and be- yond the relatively simple, time-based metaphors that are  commonly used in social media systems.  conclusion   our study applied both goffman’s [7] theatrical and ho- gan’s [11] exhibition metaphor for examining the actions  that users take for managing social media data over time.  our analysis highlighted spatial and temporal tensions  brought on by the persistence of data, extending previous  literature on self-presentation, which mainly focuses on the  decision-making process in the moment. the need for creat- ing digital content for performance purposes might contra- dict one’s intended long-term image as time goes by, as  both goals and audiences change. it is also important to  note the sense of expiration for digital content on social  media, that is, that recent content plays a role as the focus  of attention for purposeful self-presentation, and digital  content created in the past becomes “invisible” as new con- tent accumulates.  as an extension to hogan’s exhibition approach, we also  found that as social media data expire from public attention,  they not only move to an exhibition region that affords pre- senting one’s long-term image, but also gradually become  part of a personal region, where social media data functions  as a personal archive and repository for meaningful memo- ries. past interaction data has been commonly described as  “implicitly private,” where people feel strange accessing  others’ pasts and don’t expect an audience for their own.   we also discovered an implicit negotiation between users  and the system in terms of how personal data on social me- dia platform should be “exhibited”. emphasizing users’ role  in curating their digital traces both extends the concept of  curation in hogan’s theoretical model and allows us to re- think appropriate design metaphors for social media that  nicely support users’ needs and expectations.   popular social media systems, such as facebook, naturally  afford the accumulation of user data over time. we hope  that our findings about social media being a combination of  different functional regions and our proposals of alternative  metaphors for conceptualizing social media might inspire  future designs to better accommodate the many functions,  values, and faces of people using social media.  acknowledgments  this work was supported by nsf grant iis 0845351.  references  1. armstrong, d., gosling, j., weinman, j., & marteau, t.  the place of inter-rater reliability in qualitative re- session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 9


  search: an empirical study. sociology (1997), 31, 597- 606.  2. boyd, d. friendster and publicly articulated social net- working. proc. chi (2004), 1279–1282.  3. boyd, d. why youth (heart) social network sites: the  role of networked publics in teenage social life. in d.  buckingham (ed.), youth, identity, and digital media.  mit press, cambridge, ma, 2007, 119–142.  4. cosley, d., sosik, v.s., schultz, j., peesapati, s.t., &  lee, s. experiences with designing tools for everyday  reminiscing. hci 27, 1–2 (2012), 175–198.  5. ellison, n., heino, r., & gibbs, j. managing impres- sions online: self-presentation processes in the online  dating environment. jcmc 11, 2 (2006), article 2.  6. ellison, n., steinfield, c., & lampe, c. connection  strategies: social capital implications of facebook- enabled communication practices. new media & society  13, 6 (2011), 873–892.  7. goffman, e. the presentation of self in everyday life.  anchor: new york, 1959.  8. golder, s., wilkinson, d., & huberman, b. rhythms of  social interaction: messaging within a massive online  network. proc. c&t (2007), 41–66.  9. greengard, s. digitally possessed. communications of  the acm 55, 5 (2012), 14–16.  10. hangal, s., lam, m., & heer, j. muse: reviving mem- ories using email archives. proc. uist (2011), 75–84.   11. hogan, b. the presentation of self in the age of social  media: distinguishing performances and exhibitions  online. bulletin of science, technology & society 30, 6  (2010), 377–386.  12. hull, g., lipford, h.r., & latulipe, c. contextual gaps:  privacy issues on facebook. ethics and information  technology 13, 4 (2011), 289–302.  13. joinson, a.n. looking at, looking up or keeping up  with people?: motives and use of facebook. proc. chi  (2008), 1027–1036.  14. jones, w. keeping found things found: the study and  practice of personal information management. morgan  kaufmann, boston, 2008.  15. kamal, n., & fels, s. online social networks for per- sonal informatics to promote positive health behavior.  proc. wsm (2010), 47–52.  16. krämer, n.c., & winter, s. impression management  2.0. the relationship of self-esteem, extraversion, self- efficacy, and self-presentation within social networking  sites. j. media psychology 20, 3 (2008), 106–116.  17. lampe, c., ellison, n.b., & steinfield, c. changes in  use and perception of facebook. proc. cscw (2008),  721–730.  18. leary, m.r. self presentation – impression manage- ment and interpersonal behaviour. westview, boulder,  co, usa, 1996.  19. lofland, j., lofland, l. analyzing social settings: a  guide to qualitative observation and analysis.  wadsworth, belmont, ca, 1994.  20. madejski, m., johnson, m.l., & bellovin, s.m. the  failure of online social network privacy settings. co- lumbia research report cucs-010-11, 2011.  21. marshall, c.c., & shipman, f.m. social media ownership:  using twitter as a window onto current attitudes and beliefs.  proc. chi (2011), 1081–1090.  22. marwick, a.e., & boyd, d. i tweet honestly, i tweet pas- sionately: twitter users, context collapse, and the imag- ined audience. new media & society 13, 1 (2011), 114– 133.  23. mayer-schonberger, v. the virtue of forgetting in the  digital age. princeton university press, 2009.  24. miller, d., jackson, p., thrift, n., holbrook, b., &  rowlands, m. shopping, place and identity. routledge,  london, 1998.  25. munson, s., lauterbach, d., newman, m., & resnick,  p. happier together: integrating a wellness application  into a social network site. proc. persuasive (2010),  27–39.  26. nielsen, j. web usability. new riders, new york, 2000.  27. odom, w., sellen, a., harper, r., & thereska, e. lost in  translation: understanding the possession of digital things in  the cloud. proc. chi (2012), 781–790.  28. odom, w., zimmerman, j., & forlizzi, j. teenagers and  their virtual possessions: design opportunities and is- sues. proc. chi (2011), 1491–1500.  29. peesapati, s.t., schwanda, v., schultz, j., lepage, m.,  jeong, s., & cosley, d. pensieve: supporting everyday  reminiscence. proc. chi (2010), 2027–2036.  30. petrelli, d., whittaker, s., & brockmeier, j. autoto- pography: what can physical mementos tell us about  digital memories? proc. chi (2008), 53–62.  31. petrelli, d., & whittaker, s. family memories in the home:  contrasting physical and digital mementos. personal and  ubiquitous computing 14, 2 (2010), 153–169.  32. robinson, l. the cyberself: the self-ing project goes  online, symbolic interaction in the digital age. new me- dia & society 9, 1 (2007), 93–110.  33. sosik, v.s., zhao, x., & cosley, d. see friendship, sort  of: how conversation and digital traces might support  reflection on friendships. proc. cscw (2012), 1145– 1154.  34. tufekci, z. grooming, gossip, facebook and myspace.  information, comm. & society 11, 4 (2008), 544–564.  35. wang, y., norcie, g., komanduri, s., acquisti, a., leon,  p.g., & cranor, l.f. “i regretted the minute i pressed  share”: a qualitative study of regrets on facebook. proc.  soups (2011), article 10.  36. zhao, o.j., ng, t., & cosley, d. no forests without  trees: particulars and patterns in visualizing personal  communication. proc. iconference (2012), 25–32.  37. zhao, x., sosik, v.s., & cosley, d. it’s complicated:  how romantic partners use facebook. proc. chi  (2012), 771–780.  session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 10
