

the secure haptic keypad: a tactile password system  andrea bianchi  korea advanced institute of  science and technology  daejeon, korea  andrea@kaist.ac.kr  ian oakley  madeira interactive technologies institute  universidade da madeira, campus da  penteada, funchal, portugal  ian@uma.pt  dong soo kwon  korea advanced institute of  science and technology  daejeon, korea  kwonds@kaist.ac.kr    abstract  authentication in public spaces poses significant security  risks. most significantly, passwords can be stolen, potentially  leading to fraud. a common method to steal a pin is through  an observation attack, either using a camera or through direct  observation (e.g. shoulder-surfing). this paper addresses this  problem by presenting the design and implementation of a  novel input keypad which uses tactile cues as means to  compose a password. in this system, passwords are encoded  as a sequence of randomized vibration patterns, making it  visually impossible for an observer to detect which items are  selected. an evaluation of this system shows it outperforms  previous interfaces which have used tactile feedback to  obfuscate passwords.  author keywords  tactile ui, security, pin entry, user study  acm classification keywords  h5.2. user interfaces: haptic i/o  general terms  security, experimentation, human factors  introduction  interacting in public spaces to gain access to sensitive private  services is commonplace. everyday examples include bank  atms, keypad entry door systems, quick flight check-in  kiosks and many services available on computers and mobile  devices. a typical mechanism with which to access such  services is via authentication by entering numerical codes  into keypads: pin entry systems.  however, stolen pins pose a significant risk to many  systems. for example, banking terminal fraud in the united  states is estimated to cost $60 million annually [4]. one of  the simplest and most common ways to steal a pin is through  an observational attack in which the numerical keypad is  monitored either using cameras or through “shoulder- surfing”, essentially surreptitious human observation of the  password entry process [3].  this paper addresses this problem by proposing a novel  design for shoulder-surfing resistant password input based on  tactile cues. this system, the secure haptic keypad (shk),  was designed as an alternative to current alpha-numeric  keyboards and was therefore intended to be economical,  robust and capable of supporting rapid, reliable human input  of authentication passwords. the system is based around the  idea of encoding passwords as a sequence of vibration  patterns rather than characters, numerals or images [1]. this  makes it impossible for an observer (using visual means) to  detect a user’s selections.   the remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the  subsequent section describes related work; the system is then  introduced; a user study exploring human performance is  described; and the paper closes with a discussion of the  results and avenues for future work.  related work  considerable efforts have been dedicated to creating  password systems that are resistant to shoulder-surfing.  broadly, these can be grouped into four key categories,  described below.  the first category of interfaces combines textual or graphical  passwords with the presence of additional steps (overhead) to  obfuscate a user’s selection. mechanisms to achieve this  include keypad layout randomization [10] and the inclusion  of puzzles or cognitive trapdoor games [8]. although  shoulder-surfing resistant these approaches are vulnerable to  camera based visual recording attacks. the second category  consists of gaze-based password entry systems. in such  systems, users select the input from an on-screen keyboard  using eye motions [6]. although relatively reliable and  immune to observational attack, this method requires  expensive specialized hardware devices. the third group  features systems which rely on hardware interfaces owned  and carried by users, such as mobile devices. as such  systems are not a part of the public infrastructure attackers  are unable to manipulate them. examples include  authentication to public terminals via mobile phones  equipped with acceleration sensors [7] or through  establishing a complimentary tactile channel to obfuscate a  standard numerical pin entry [3]. however, such methods  suffer from a weakness to man-in-the-middle attacks on the  (typically wireless) connections between the personal and  public devices. they are also vulnerable to the theft of the  personal device [7].  permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  chi 2010, april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, georgia, usa.  copyright 2010 acm  978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00.    chi 2010: input, security, and privacy policies april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1089


  the last group of interfaces consists of special purpose  devices which use haptic input or output to obfuscate a  password entry process. a recent example is undercover [9],  a system which combines a hidden tactile challenge with the  selection of a graphical password. the method described in  the paper fits firmly in this final category, but is intended to  address the weaknesses of prior work through reduced error  rates, entry times and the (implied) levels of cognitive load  which contributes to these. the key mechanism with which  this is achieved is through the use of a uni-modal haptic  password, rather than one which requires more complex  multi-modal information.  system description  the shk uses a special keypad constructed of three  physically independent buttons each capable of sensing  finger input and rendering vibrotactile cues in the form of  tactons [2], or structured vibration patterns. although tactons  can involve multiple dimensions (such as amplitude and  duration), those used in the shk vary solely in the frequency  with which vibration pulses are delivered. three tactons are  used, corresponding to the number of buttons, with  frequencies of 1hz, 2hz and continuous activation.   passwords in the system take the form of a sequence of these  tactons. when entering a password the three keys each  display one of the tactons and the user must physically search  the keypad to identify which key should be pressed to  correctly enter the next password item. upon entering an  item, the tactons are randomized among the keys and the next  item can be sought and entered. no visual feedback is  provided, meaning this entry mechanism is not susceptible to  visual observation attack. the choice of three keys and  tactons is intended to minimize cognitive load and was  motivated by the fact that people perform better in absolute  judgment tasks featuring a small number of options [11].  implementation  the shk is implemented with three identical bespoke  hardware keys integrating physical switches and pressure  sensors on their topmost surface and linear coil vibrotactile  actuators within their casing. they are connected to an  arduino microcontroller interfaced to a personal computer  and are shown in figure 1. the switches allow users to make  selections events while the fsr is used to detect contact and  also to adjust the strength of the vibrotactile output: the  harder the pressure, the greater the magnitude of the tactile  cue presented. all software was written in java and the  arduino framework.   password design  two forms of interaction mode were designed for this  hardware platform: normal and hybrid. in the normal mode,  passwords consist of sequences of tactons which a user must  seek out and select. tactons are randomized on keys after  each entry and each key always displays a unique tacton. the  hybrid mode is more complex. prior to entering each tacton  in the password, the system asks the user to either insert the  correct tacton (as in the normal mode) or to insert its  complement – to simultaneously press the keys which do not  show the current pin tacton. in this mode, the one-to-one  correspondence of keys to tactons is broken, meaning that  users may be required to select one, two or three keys. the  system ensures that at least one tacton is different from the  others, resulting in seven possible input choices for every  password item.  security analysis  this work aims to build an interface which is resilient to  observation and brute-force attacks; more sophisticated  attacks, including social engineering, are not considered. an  adequate level of security is defined as a password which can  be guessed with a probability of 1/10,000, a figure equivalent  to a 4-digit numerical password and commonly adopted as a  target by other researchers [9]. according to this definition  the security of the normal and hybrid modes differs. the  susceptibility of the normal mode to both brute force and  (given the randomization of tactons to keys) observation  attacks can be calculated simply by 3i where i the number of  password items. the hybrid mode is a more complex case.  password items in complement mode are more resistant to  purely brute force (in which keys are pressed at random) and  visual observation attacks due to the higher number of  possible input combinations. a password in purely  complement mode would offer a level of security of 7i.  however, this mode is susceptible to a more time consuming  brute force attack involving exhaustive tactile exploration of  the keys to determine the currently valid set of inputs prior to  each tacton entry. this attack reduces the performance to that  of the normal mode: 3i. a password composed of a mix of  normal and complementary items will have a level of  security to pure brute force and observation attacks  proportional to the mix of items.   evaluation  two evaluations of the system were performed. the first was  a simple pilot study with four participants intended to  ascertain basic recognition rates and times for the tactile cues.  it used a simplified version of the display hardware  consisting of a single vibrotactile actuator in a single button  and involved participants experiencing one of the tactons and  then identifying it using a simple gui. after a 15 trial  practice session, a total of 60 trials (20 of each cue) were  presented in two blocks of 30. participants wore headphones  and listened to white noise throughout to mask any noises  figure 1. plan view of the shk hardware. chi 2010: input, security, and privacy policies april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1090


from the actuator. the results were encouraging: no errors  were recorded, indicating that subjects found the task  straightforward. mean task completion times were also  acceptable and varied for the 3 cues as follows: 1hz (2.4s,  sd 0.08s); 2hz (2.44s, sd 0.15s); and continuous (2.7s, sd  1.5s). although no formal analysis was performed on these  data, these results suggest that identifying the continuous cue  required that both the others first be eliminated.   building on these positive results, an exploratory study to  investigate optimal design of a tactile password was  conducted. the goal of this study was to gather performance  data to contrast the shk against prior work such as  undercover [9]. a secondary goal was to explore  performance differences between the normal and hybrid  modes in order to compare simple direct input and input  which requires more complex cognitive mappings. the  results of this assessment will provide directions for further  development of tactile password concept.   participants  12 participants volunteered for this study. they had a mean  age of 29 and were a mix of students, researchers and  members of the general public. 4 reported themselves  familiar with haptic technology and 10 to be advanced  computer users. several of them had casually experienced the  shk hardware while it was under development.   experimental design and procedure  the study tested 3 conditions. two used the normal mode  and featured 6 and 9 item passwords. respectively, these  have a resilience to brute force and observation attacks of 36  (1/729) and 39 (19,863). the third condition used the hybrid  mode and a 6 item password, weighted such that 55% of  requests over the study asked for complementary responses.  correctly determining a password using purely brute force or  visual attacks was therefore at a level of 1/(7(0.55*6) * 3(0.45*6))  or 1/11941. the susceptibility to a brute force attack based on  fully exploring the pin items presented in compliment mode  was 36 (1/729). selecting these three conditions allowed the  exploration of the tradeoff between using additional pin  items and more complex input mappings to increase security.  the study used a fully balanced repeated measures design  with each participant completing each of the 3 experimental  conditions in one of the six possible order conditions. each  experimental condition was composed of 10 trials, each  taking the form of a complete pin entry, and was preceded  by a 6 trial practice condition. the experimental data is  therefore based on a total of 10 pin entries by 3 conditions  by 12 subjects, or a total of 360 complete pin entries  composed of 2520 individual selection events.   passwords were preset and presented to users at the start of  the experiment using an iconic visual notation system  illustrated in figure 2. during the practice sessions, these  visual representations were shown to reinforce learning, but  were hidden during experimental sessions.    figure 2. the iconic tacton pin notation. shows a 6 item pin  with the following tactons: cont., 2hz, cont., 1hz, 1hz, 2hz.   participants were also exposed to a short informal  introduction to the system and its cues prior to the start of the  experiment. earmuffs were worn throughout to minimize the  impact of noise from the hardware and the entire experiment  took approximately 30 minutes to complete.   the experimental measures included the time and correctness  of explicit button selections and also the number and duration  of contacts with the button surfaces (captured from the force  sensors). total trial time was measured from the first time a  user touched a key after a trial commenced. workload was  measured using a nasa tlx questionnaire [5] administered  after each condition.  results  median task completion times for the three experimental  conditions are shown in figure 3 (left). medians were used to  minimize the effect of outliers. an anova revealed a  significant trend in these data (f (2, 11) = 39.6, p<0.001)  which was fully borne out by subsequent post-hoc pair-wise  t-tests (all significant at p<0.01). figure 3 (right) shows the  errors in the form of mean percentage failed authentications.  although considerable differences are visible in the data, an  anova did not reveal a significant effect (f (2, 11) = 0.9,  p=0.37), probably due to the high variance. finally, the tlx  data appear in figure 4. a one-way anova on overall  workload showed a significant effect (f (2, 11) = 4.67,  p=0.016).   figure 3. task times & error rates from authentication study  chi 2010: input, security, and privacy policies april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1091


  discussion and conclusions  performance was best using the normal mode with a 6 item  pin; this is unsurprising. however, contrasting these results  to those in the 9 pin condition is interesting. the 1.5 ratio  between both the task completion times and number of pin  items suggests that users did not find entering additional pin  items to be more challenging. this notion is confirmed by the  similarity in the error rate between these two conditions. this  indicates that users found it relatively easy to remember the  tactile pin, recognize the tactons and physically use the  system. this is an encouraging result supporting the concepts  underlying the shk. on the other hand, the hybrid condition  performed worse than the other two conditions in both time  and (non-significantly) in errors. the additional cognitive  effort, visible in the tlx data, required to use this condition  is likely to blame. as one participant remarked, “in the  hybrid mode you need to remember what you have to do  before choosing the right key”. sacrificing the normal  mode’s direct interaction (of finding a tacton and simply  selecting its key) clearly added complexity to the task.   however, a caveat to this conclusion comes from comparing  the results of this study with previous work. in particular,  undercover [9] is designed with highly similar goals to the  shk and also relies on tactile cues to obfuscate password  entry. however, undercover’s median task completion times  are reported to be 25-45 seconds, with a substantial number  of users taking in excess of one minute to authenticate. error  rates for entire password entries are 26%-52%. in light of this  data, performance using the uni-modal shk looks highly  promising. in particular the simple act of exploring tactons  and immediately performing selection actions to enter pin  items in the same physical space appears rapid, easy to grasp  and effective.   future work on this system should tackle a number of  pressing issues. for example, although designed to address  visual observation, research on the shk needs also consider  its susceptibility to audio observation attacks which listen for  the noise the vibration actuators produce. tackling this may  require exploration of a range of tactile technologies (such as  piezoelectric pins) or the production of interference using  conventional speakers. in a similar vein, more ecologically  valid experimentation needs also take place. this will  involve staging observation and recording attacks on shk  pin entries in order to determine whether there is physical  (or behavioral) evidence which allows an attacker to deduce  a pin. exploring the memorability and learnability of tactile  passwords is also a key area for future research. for example,  determining retention rates for structured tactile passwords  over time is a clear next step for this work. finally, although  user performance with the shk represents an improvement  over prior work, further development to optimize the system  to maximize security while minimizing task completion  times, errors rates and cognitive load is still required.   references  1. blonder, g. e. graphical passwords. united states patent  5559961, 1996   2. brewster, s. a. and brown, l. m. non-visual information  display using tactons. in ext abs of chi '04. acm, ny,  2004, pp. 787-788.  3. de luca, a., von zezschwitz, e., and hußmann, h. 2009.  vibrapass: secure authentication based on shared lies. in  procs. of chi '09. acm, ny, pp. 913-916.  4. giesen, l. atm fraud: does it warrant the expense to  fight it? banking strategies, 2006, vol. 82, issue 6.   5. hart, s. g., & staveland, l. e. development of a multi- dimensional workload rating scale. in human mental  workload, 1988, 139-183. elsevier.  6. kumar, m., garfinkel, t., boneh, d., and winograd, t.  reducing shoulder-surfing by using gaze-based pass-  word entry. in procs of the 3rd symposium on usable  privacy and security (soups '07), vol. 229. acm, ny,  2007, pp. 13-19.    7. patel, s. n., pierce, j. s., and abowd, g. d. 2004. a  gesture-based authentication scheme for untrusted public  terminals. in procs of uist '04. acm, ny.  8. roth, v., richter, k., and freidinger, r. a pin-entry  method resilient against shoulder surfing. in procs of the  11th acm conference on computer and  communications security, (ccs '04). acm, ny, 2004.  9. sasamoto, h., christin, n., and hayashi, e. undercover:  authentication usable in front of prying eyes. in procs of  chi '08. acm, new york, ny, 2008, pp. 183-192.    10.tan, d. s., keyani, p., and czerwinski, m. spy-resistant  keyboard: more secure password entry on public touch  screen displays. in procs of the 17th australia  conference on computer-human interaction , pp. 1-10.   11.wickens, c. d. & hollands, j. g. engineering  psychology & human performance, 2000, prentice hall. figure 4. tlx data from authentication study.  chi 2010: input, security, and privacy policies april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1092
