

favors from facebook friends: unpacking dimensions of  social capital  yumi jung, rebecca gray  michigan state university  409 comm arts building  east lansing, mi 48224  [jungyum1, grayreb2]@msu.edu  cliff lampe, nicole b. ellison  university of michigan   105 s. state st  ann arbor mi, 48109  [cacl, enicole]@umich.edu    abstract  past research has demonstrated a link between perceptions  of social capital and use of the popular social network site,  facebook. williams’ internet social capital scales, based  on putnam’s formulation, tap into sub-dimensions of social  capital that have not been broadly used yet may enlighten  our understanding of the different ways in which  connecting with others online can facilitate access to  resources embedded within our social relationships. in this  study, we segment williams’ internet social capital scales  into various sub-dimensions using factor analysis and  explicate the distinct facets of social capital through a lab  experiment in which facebook users (n=98) request a small  favor from their facebook network. we find that some sub- dimensions play a significant role in getting favors from  facebook friends while bonding and bridging social capital  do not significantly predict responses to favor requests.  author keywords   social capital; favor asking; facebook network  acm classification keywords  h.5.3. information interfaces and presentation (e.g., hci):  group and organization interfaces.   introduction  social media tools can support how people build, maintain,  and benefit from social relationships.  in chi and related  fields, one way these relational benefits have been  measured is through the construct of social capital [5, 14,  19]. social capital is a conceptual framework that considers  the resources held by those in one’s social network and  which are available to an individual [3, 8, 22]. researchers  have argued that social network sites (snss) such as  facebook reduce the transaction costs of maintaining a  larger (and potentially more diverse) social network, enable  individuals to engage in relationship maintenance activities  with their connections, and facilitate the extraction of  resources from the network [9, 11, 15].  one important characteristic of social capital is its ability to  be converted into other kinds of benefits such as  educational and health outcomes [23]. previous social  capital literature has explored social capital as related to  hierarchical social status such as income, social class, or  performance (e.g., academic or job performance). however,  there are many everyday life situations that can also be  framed as outcomes of social capital, such as getting small  favors from friends and acquaintances. in this study, we  create an opportunity for participants to request help from  their network in a way that renders these offers of  assistance visible – and thus measurable – in an attempt to  capture one outcome of social capital in everyday life.    another contribution of this study stems from our efforts to  break down the social capital variable to its simplest  components or sub-dimensions. most of the work  examining the role of social media and social capital has  focused on the use of perceptual measures, primarily the  internet social capital scales (iscs) developed by dmitri  williams [33]. the questions used in surveys have often  collapsed social capital into two major dimensions, which  may be missing more fine-grained nuances of the overall  concept. since putnam [22] integrated several lines of  research in his popular book bowling alone, researchers  have focused on bridging social capital, a type of social  capital which often results from distant ties within a  network, and bonding social capital, which is associated  with closer relationships. although williams’ [33] survey  scales, based on putnam’s work, are often used, his  discussion of the sub-dimensions of social capital has not  been broadly utilized. we believe they provide a thoughtful  approach to studying the different ways our social  relationships provide resources, and thus explore them here.   in this paper, we examine an artificially induced instance of  social capital conversion – a task in which people asked  their facebook friends for a favor  – in order to document  its relationship to social capital measures.  in exploring this  relationship, we show how social capital, which has  typically been measured as two main dimensions, actually  contains multiple facets. we identify distinct facets of  social capital through a factor analysis and show that  considering these multiple facets may help scholars better  understand the way in which online behaviors mediate  access to social resources embedded in one’s social    permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies  bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise,  or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior  specific permission and/or a fee.  chi 2013, april 27–may 2, 2013, paris, france.  copyright © 2013 acm  978-1-4503-1899-0/13/04...$15.00.    session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 11


   network, thus enabling them to design social computing  systems that capitalize on these social capital dynamics.   literature review  social capital describes the benefits individuals can access  through their social network; these benefits can include  emotional support, material support, and novel information  [3, 8, 16, 22]. thus, the constitution of one’s social network  is directly related to one’s level of perceived social capital.  the relationship between perceived social capital and  activities with one’s online social network have been  examined in many social media studies [5, 6, 14, 26, 31].   putnam [22] identified different components of social  capital – bridging and bonding social capital – that describe  resources that can be mobilized from different types of  social network connections or relationships. as previously  mentioned, bonding social capital is related to strong ties,  like a connection between similar kinds of people such as  family and close friends, and is associated with access to  meaningful social and emotional support. bridging social  capital is associated with interactions with weak ties, such  as casual friends and acquaintances [32]. weak ties are  more likely to be bridging ties, connecting dispersed  clusters, and are more likely to represent access to the  novel, diverse perspectives and information [20, 22] that are  hallmarks of bridging social capital.  one example of social capital in action is getting help or  information from someone in one’s social network when in  need. asking questions is a way of seeking information on  snss [15, 18], and sns users can request favors from their  online social network by broadcasting requests via status  updates. as described above, previous research has found a  positive relationship between social capital and sns use.  most of these studies have examined perceptions of social  capital, as opposed to actual instances of resource  exchange. this is due in large part to the difficulty of  translating social capital dynamics to an experimental,  artificial situation. this study examines an actual instance  of social resource mobilization to examine the effects of  social capital more empirically.   stefanone et al. [25] explored this question by conducting  an empirical study about users getting help from their  facebook networks. the study measured perceived  bridging and bonding social capital using williams’ online  social capital measures [33] to look at the relationship  between social capital and support from facebook friends  in the form of help on class-related tasks. in the study, there  was no significant relationship between either form of  perceived social capital and getting support from their  online social networks [25].  possible reasons for the lack  of significant relationships between social capital and  receipt of support from facebook friends include the  closeness of these friends with the participants (participants  were instructed to ask both closest and weakest ties for  help). these individuals may or may not represent their  larger networks. for instance, social capital support  (measured here as a response to a request for help) from  mid-range ties in one’s network was not assessed.    the insignificant relationship might also be due to the fact  that sub-dimensions of social capital were not considered.  we believe that unpacking the bonding and bridging  dimensions of social capital to consider other instrumental  aspects of the concept, in order to see what specific factors  affect the responsiveness of one’s network when asking  favors, represents a useful approach to this issue.  in past research on the measurement of social capital,  williams [33] created a measure of online social capital by  merging different dimensions of social networks based on  putnam’s [13, 22] conceptual criteria for social capital.  williams’ internet social capital scales consists of two ten- item scales (bonding and bridging) that encompass multiple  dimensions of the concepts. williams’ bridging social  capital measure consists of four different conceptual  dimensions: outward looking, contact with a broad range of  people, a view of oneself as part of broader group, and  diffuse reciprocity with a broader community [13, 33]. his  bonding social capital measure consists of another four  dimensions: emotional support, access to scarce or limited  resources, ability to mobilize solidarity, and out-group  antagonism [33]. because each sub-dimension has a  different conceptual orientation, different dimensions might  have different effects on certain outcomes. for example,  although all the three sub-dimensions of bonding social  capital are related to a higher level of closeness, social  resources for emotional support and access to limited  resources might be different. in the same way, there is a  possibility that emotional support affects getting favors  while the ability to mobilize solidarity, a different  dimension of bonding social capital, does not.   most social media studies of social capital employ the  simpler bridging and bonding scales and typically do not  acknowledge or make use of the sub-dimensional measures.  ferlander [12] pointed out that “although social capital is  seen as a multidimensional concept, most empirical studies  rely on one-dimensional measures” ([12], p.119). although  williams developed the sub-dimensions of the bonding and  bridging social capital scales conceptually, he only  statistically distinguished between the two factors of  bridging and bonding social capital; he did not statistically  confirm the groupings of the sub-dimensions.   to tease apart and assess the different dimensions of these  forms of social capital in relationship to an empirical social  capital outcome (performing a favor), this study employs  both ways of measuring social capital, using the bonding  and bridging measures as well as the sub-dimensions of  bonding and bridging social capital as separate variables.  specifically, this study looks at the relationship between  perceived social capital and getting responses to a favor  session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 12


   request, as well as the relationship between each sub- dimension of social capital and the number of responses.   h1: bridging and bonding social capital will be positively  associated with the number of responses to a favor request  on facebook.  rq1: how do different dimensions of social capital relate  to the number of responses to a favor request on facebook?    facebook-specific variables  actual friends  early work on the relationship between social capital and  facebook use employed a measure of facebook use that  aggregated the number of total friends on the site, time on  the site, and six attitudinal measures. this aggregate  measure, facebook intensity (fbi), was positively  predictive of both bonding and bridging social capital  perceptions among a sample of college undergraduates [27].  later work employed a different measure and examined  both the number of “total facebook friends” and the  number of “actual” facebook friends; “actual” friends  assessed users’ perceptions of how many of their total  connections on the site could be considered actual friends,  or more meaningful ties [11].  this work found that the  number of “actual” friends on facebook was predictive of  perceived bridging social capital, whereas “total” friends  was not. as we expect perceptions of bridging social capital  to be positively related to the number of responses  individuals receive to their favor request, we similarly  expect “actual” friends to be a significant positive predictor  of the number of responses received.  thus, we predict:  h2: participants with more actual facebook friends will  receive more favor responses from their facebook network.  relational maintenance and reciprocity on facebook   reciprocity is a key facet of social capital. the expectation  of reciprocity is an inherent component of building social  capital, although expectations can be violated [21]. one  way in which social capital is maintained is through social  grooming activities and other relationship maintenance  behaviors that signal attention to one’s network. facebook  is an effective context for performing these kinds of social  interaction because it enables individuals to engage in  social grooming with a larger network than might otherwise  be possible [9]. ellison et al. [11] test the role of a variable  labeled “signals of relational investment (sri),” which  captures the propensity to perform facebook-enabled  reciprocal relational maintenance behaviors, such as  answering a question posed to one’s network or writing  “happy birthday” on a friend’s wall. the performance of  these signals of relational investment positively predicted  bridging social capital in other work [11], thus we expect:   h3: participants’ propensity to perform signals of  relational investment will be positively related to the  number of responses to a favor request.  question-asking and favor requests on facebook  beyond the number of friends to whom one is connected  online and the relational maintenance behaviors one reports  performing, we wonder what effect previous experience  asking help of one’s network may have on the reception of  later favor requests. although no extant research has looked  at how the frequency with which one asks questions or  favors of her network impacts the success of subsequent  requests, we believe the routine or frequent performance of  these behaviors may lead to more fruitful outcomes for  favor-askers.  it may be that frequently asking questions of  one’s network leads to greater overall visibility in the news  feed according to the algorithm used by facebook to  prioritize posts [2]; thus, more frequent posters may be  more likely to receive responses when posting a request for  a favor on the site.  another possibility is that frequently  asking questions may give individuals experience that  makes them more effective question-askers over time.  this  experience may translate to the realm of getting help with  favors and thus lead to more success (a higher number of  responses).  thus, we ask:  rq2: does the frequency of asking for help on facebook  impact the number of responses one receives to a favor  request on the site?  rhetorical features of online requests and network  responsiveness  although network structure, closeness with others, and  other behaviors on facebook may serve as meaningful  predictors of the extent to which friends will respond to an  online favor, past research suggests that the actual way in  which one asks for help may impact the responses one  receives from his or her network.   burke, joyce, kim,  anand and kraut [4] examined rhetorical properties of  messages posted on usenet, finding that actual requests  were more likely to receive responses than were non- requests.  more recently teevan, morris, and panovich [29]  explored the effects of various question characteristics on  response quality, quantity, and speed within friend  networks on facebook.  when information-seekers targeted  specific audiences in their requests, kept questions brief,  and utilized question marks, the facebook users obtained  faster, higher-quality responses [29].     in the present study, in which participants were asked to  request a small online favor of their facebook friends, we  similarly expect that particular characteristics of the favor  request may be more or less instrumental in eliciting  responses. thus we explore the relationship between the  number of strategies that participants use and the number of  responses participants receive from their network.   h4:  participants who use more strategies are more likely  to get a higher level of responses from their facebook  networks.  finally, we are interested in both identifying the types of  rhetorical strategies that participants use and determining  session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 13


   which of these strategies are most effective at gaining  responses from one’s network.  rq3: what types of strategies are most effective for getting  a higher level of responses from facebook networks?  method  data collection   data presented in this paper were collected as part of a  larger research study of sns-enabled information- seeking.  non-faculty staff at a large, public midwestern  university were invited in october-november 2011 and  february-march 2011 to complete an online survey about  their use of online communication tools, which explored  many aspects of (and attitudes toward) facebook use,  question-asking in sns settings, and dimensions of social  capital.  of the 3150 staff members invited to take the  survey, 666 participated (21% response rate), and 106 of  the survey respondents were recruited to participate in a lab  study, based on self-reports of performing question-asking  behavior on facebook.   all participants received a  minimum of $10 in amazon.com credit but had the  opportunity to receive up to $15 (described below).  during the lab session, participants were asked to post a  status update asking their facebook friends to do them the  “favor” of filling out a brief questionnaire, provided in a  hyperlink.  in order to incentivize participants, prior to  posting the survey/favor request in a status update,  participants were informed that for each of the first 10  responses they received, they would receive an additional  $0.50 on their amazon card (amounting to an additional  incentive of up to but not exceeding $5).   participants were  able to write whatever they chose to encourage their  friends to click on the link and complete the survey and  were also given a copy of the survey for reference. our  rationale for choosing a short questionnaire to serve as the  “favor” was that – unlike a question, which may require  specific knowledge to answer – any facebook friend could  perform the favor task.   the favor questionnaire was comprised of 9 items,  including questions about the connection between the  responder and the participant (e.g., relational closeness,  relationship type), expectations of reciprocity, facebook  use, and education level.  one of the items also asked the  favor respondents to fill in the name of the person that  asked them to complete the questionnaire.  this allowed us  to link the data from the favor survey to the participant data  in the main survey. note that filling out the questionnaire  was low effort and was likely to take only a few moments  of the favor doers’ time, although we did ask them to add a  facebook application before accessing the online  questionnaire to help link the data.  a total of 98 lab participants completed this task, posting  the request and survey link on facebook.  participants were  73.2% female, an average of 42.7 years old, and 85% had  obtained a bachelor’s degree or higher.    measures   facebook use.    actual friends is a 1-item measure created by ellison et al.  [10] which asks: “approximately how many of your  total facebook friends do you consider actual friends?”  participants had an average of 102 (sd = 105) actual  facebook friends. table 1 shows average and mean values  of each variable.  frequency of asking for help was measured with two items:  “how often do you use facebook to (1) ask questions of  your facebook friends? (2) ask your facebook friends for  favors?” each item was asked with a 5-point scale (1 =  never, 2 = rarely, 3 = sometimes, 4 = often, 5 = very  often). the items were averaged and inter-item correlation  for the two is .56. using the inter-item correlation is  recommended when a variable has two items, and 0.5 is  considered a good value [30].  signals of relational investment (sri) this 5-item scale  (alpha = .78, m = 4.09, sd = 0.50) has been used in  previous work, and it measures the extent to which  participants report signaling attention to specific facebook  friends in their network.  the items capture users’  perceptions of the extent to which they respond to friends’  posts and reach out to offer support.  one of the items also  probes how likely participants are to post “happy birthday”  on their friends’ walls, which represents another method of  signaling that one is paying attention to specific  friends.  example items include “when i see someone  asking a question on facebook that i know the answer to, i  try to respond” and “when i see someone asking for advice  on facebook, i try to respond.”    social capital   the facebook social capital measure was adapted from  williams’ [33] internet social capital scales. the wording  of each item was adjusted to the facebook context, and  both bonding and bridging social capital were assessed.   variable mean (sd)  actual friends 102 (105)  frequency of asking help 2.88 (.73)  signals of relational investment (sri) 4.09 (.50)  n of strategies 3.08 (1.17)  bridging social capital 3.77 (.49)  bonding social capital 3.68 (.56)  new variables from bridging social capital      outward-looking 3.98(.48)     broader group 3.80(.63)     new people 3.41(.95)  new variables from bonding social capital      individual benefit 3.86 (.50)     collective action (more sacrifice) 3.52 (.66)  table 1: sample characteristics    session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 14


   bridging social capital (alpha = .81 m =3.77, sd = .49) is a  10-item scale that captures the extent to which participants  feel they have access to new information and diverse  perspectives within their facebook social network.  example items include: “interacting with people in my  facebook network makes me want to try new things” and  “interacting with people in my facebook network makes  me feel connected to the bigger picture.”  bonding social capital (alpha = .78 m =3.68, sd = .56) is a  10-item scale that taps into perceptions of access to  significant social and emotional support within their  facebook networks.  example items include: “when i feel  lonely, there are several people in my facebook network i  can talk to,” and “the people i interact with in my  facebook network would share their last dollar with me.”  sub-dimensions of social capital   to construct the bonding social capital measure, williams  [33] initially created 24-items representing five sub- dimensions: emotional support, access to limited resources,  ability to mobilize solidarity, out-group antagonism, and  homogeneity. he created 22 items for bridging social  capital from four sub-dimensions: outward-looking,  interaction with new people, part of a broader group, and  diffuse reciprocity. williams reduced both bridging and  bonding to ten items each through exploratory factor  analysis. thus each scale for bonding and bridging social  capital collapses these different conceptual sub-dimensions.  through this reduction process, all items from ability to  mobilize solidarity, homogeneity, and diffuse reciprocity  were excluded, so bonding and bridging social capital had  three factors respectively.    in order to confirm sub-factors of the two-scale, 20-item  measurement, we performed confirmatory factor analysis  (cfa) based on the conceptual dimensions. cfa was  conducted using amos 20.0 to examine the construct  validity of a three factor-solution extracted from the  original bridging and bonding social capital scales.  the  model fit was assessed by chi-square, cfi (comparative fit  index) and rmsea (root mean square error of  approximation). the chi-square value is the basic measure  for checking overall model fit, and cfi evaluates the model  factors  items   factor loading alpha  bridging social capital    outward- looking  1 interacting with people in my facebook network makes me interested in things that  happen outside of my town.  .709 .74  2 interacting with people in my facebook network makes me want to try new things. .721   3 interacting with people in my facebook network makes me interested in what people  unlike me are thinking.   .566   4 talking with people in my facebook network makes me curious about other places in the  world.  .524   broader  group  5 interacting with people in my facebook network makes me feel like part of a larger  community.  .869 .79  6 interacting with people in my facebook network makes me feel connected to the bigger  picture.  .888   7 interacting with people in my facebook network reminds me that everyone in the world  is connected.  .633   8 i am willing to spend time to support general facebook community activities. .457   meeting  new  people  9 interacting with people in my facebook network gives me new people to talk to. .965 .69   (inter-item  correlation)  10 through my facebook network, i come in contact with new people all the time. .721  bonding social capital  individual  benefit  1 there are several people in my facebook network i trust to help solve my problems. .633 .76  2 there is someone in my facebook network i can turn to for advice about making very  important decisions.  .829    3 there is no one in my facebook network that i feel comfortable talking to about intimate  personal problems.   (not included)   4 when i feel lonely, there are several people in my facebook network i can talk to. .561    5 if i needed an emergency loan of $500, i know someone in my facebook network i can  turn to.  .621    7 the people i interact with in my facebook network would be good job references for me. .561   collective  action  (more  sacrifice)  6 the people i interact with in my facebook network would put their reputation on the line  for me.  .888 .76  8 the people i interact with in my facebook network would share their last dollar with me. .858  9 i do not know people in my facebook network well enough to get them to do anything  important.   .413    10 the people i interact with in my facebook network would help me fight an injustice. .523   table 2 sub-dimension variables from bridging and bonding social capital        session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 15


   by comparing the chi-square value to the chi-square of the  null model. cfi is customized for a small sample size [28].  the rmsea is a supplementary statistic of chi-square to  assess model fit. the cfa model’s fit is acceptable when  ratio of χ2 to df is less than 3.00, comparative fit index  (cfi) is .95 or higher, and root mean square error of  approximation (rmsea) is between .06 and .08 [33].   sub-dimensions of bridging social capital   the three-factor model showed a good fit with the data, χ2  (32) = 46.16, χ2/df=1.44, cfi= .95, and rmsea = .068.  cronbach’s alphas for sub-scales were .74 (outward- looking) and .79 (broader group) respectively. the third  variable (meeting new people) consisted of two items and  its inter-item correlation was .69.  sub-dimensions of bonding social capital  the cfa model fit was not adequate with the three-factor  model. the cfa modification indices in the present study  suggested controlling correlations among item numbers 1,  2, 4, 5, and 7, and the modification suggested a two-factor  model rather than three factors. see table 2 for items in the  two factors.   modification is one of the functions in amos to suggest a  better model fit. one item (no. 3 in the table) measuring  emotional support was excluded because it had a very low  factor loading value and reduced the reliability of the scale.  the two-factor model showed a good fit with the data,  χ2(26) = 35.220, χ2/df=1.35, cfi= .97, and rmsea = .058.  cronbach’s alphas for sub-scale were .76 (individual  benefit) and .76 (collective action) respectively. after  completing the cfa tests, we averaged items in each factor.  among the three new variables from bridging social capital,  the participants had an average scores in outward-looking  of 3.98 (sd = .48), broader group of 3.80 (sd = .63), and  new people of 3.41 (sd = .95). regarding the two variables  from bonding social capital, the participants had, on  average, an individual benefit score of 3.86 (sd = .50) and a  collective action score of 3.52  (sd = .66).  rhetorical strategies to elicit responses  content analysis was used to analyze the posts the favor- doers broadcasted to their network during the lab session.  one of the authors made a first pass through the favor- asking posts and made a list of recurring rhetorical  strategies utilized by participants to elicit responses from  their network. the research team finalized six types of  strategies through multiple iterations. two members of the  research team coded all of the posts using the categories.  the two coders were allowed to assign multiple strategies  to each post. besides the rhetorical strategy coding, the  aggregate number of strategies per post was counted to  create a new variable, “number of strategies,” for regression  analysis. cohen’s kappa was calculated for each strategy  and the total number of strategies. the kappa for all  categories was 1.0. table 3 contains the categories and  status update examples.  results  effects on the number of responses  the dependent variable of this study was the total number  of responses to the favor-asking posting. this is count data  without negative numbers. poisson regression was invented  for analyzing count data. the assumption of distribution for  poisson regression is that the mean value should be close to  the variance. but the present data contains evidence of  overdispersion, which means variance is much higher than  the mean value (m = 3.4, variance=12.5), so negative  binomial analysis is a more appropriate choice.   we examined the correlation matrix for multicollinearity in  table 4. in this sample, no correlations above the value of r  > .8 were identiﬁed. the variance inﬂation factors (vifs)  were below the critical value of 10 (highest vif = 1.63),  indicating no serious biasing effect. the tolerance statistic  for all variables have values greater than 0.1 [34]. we  therefore concluded that there was no significant threat to  the validity of the regression analysis.   table 5 shows the results from the negative binomial  regression including both the original bridging and bonding  social capital measures (model 1) and the sub-dimensions  of social capital (model 2) as independent variables  separately. average marginal effect estimations are shown  in table 5. model 1 includes the original williams social  capital measures, and the model is statistically significant (p  = 0.035) with a pseudo r2 of 0.031. model 2 includes the  sub-dimensions of social capital as separate independent  variables. the model is statistically significant (p = 0.045),  with a pseudo r2 of 0.018.  strategy categories example   number of posts  & percent  utilizing strategy  thanks in advance* “thank you for helping me” 52 (53.1%)  signal of brevity*     "take a couple of minutes  and do so!" 43 (43.9%)  research  study/science*    "i'm participating in a  research study that is  examining…"  27 (27.6%)  university mention*     "i'm in the process of  going through a survey for  the c dept at [university]"  21 (21.4%)  spam disclaimer*  "this isn't a spam" 81 (82.7%)  money incentive  mentioned*     "i will get $.50 in an  amazon cash (which is  like gold!!) for everyone  of you complete the  survey"  79 (80.6%)  *yes = 1  table 3: favor-asking strategy categories  session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 16


   in model 1, neither bridging nor bonding social capital has  a significant effect on the number of responses, in effect  failing to support h1 which predicted a positive association  between perceptions of bridging and bonding social capital  and the number of responses to a favor request. in model 2,  the sub-dimensions meeting new people of bridging social  capital and individual benefit of bonding social capital have  significant relationships with the number of responses. the  results show that sub-dimensions of social capital affect the  number of responses to the favor differently. some sub- dimensions have no significant impact on the response rate,  providing insight into rq1, which asked “how do different  dimensions of social capital relate to the number of  responses to a favor request?” a one-unit increase in  individual benefit leads to a 1.68 unit increase in a number  of responses (β=1.68, p<0.05). new people had a marginal  negative effect, so a one-unit increase in new people leads  to a .90 unit decrease in a number of responses (β=-.90,  p=0.05).    in both models, the effects of the number of actual friends  and sri are not significant, so h2 and h3 , which predicted  a positive relationship between number of actual friends  and the number of favor responses and between sri and the  number of favor responses respectively, are not supported.  the frequency of asking for help (rq2) has a significant,  positive effect on the number of responses in both models.  a one-unit increase in the frequency of asking for help leads  to a 1.87 unit increase in the number of responses on  average (β = 1.87, p = 0.5) in model 1. in model 2, a one- unit increase in frequency of asking for help leads to 1.78  unit increase in the number of responses (β=1.78, p<0.05).  h4, which predicted a positive relationship between the  number of rhetorical strategies utilized and the number of  responses to a favor request, was supported. a one-unit  increase in the number of strategies leads to a .96 unit  increase in the number of responses on average (β=.96, p=  0.5) in model 1. in model 2, a one-unit increase in the  number of rhetorical strategies leads to a 1.02 unit increase  in the number of responses (β=1.02, p<0.05).   types of rhetorical strategies to elicit favors  partial correlation was assessed to investigate rq3, the  relationship between types of strategies utilized and the  number of responses received. because the total number of  responses is expected to relate to the total number of  possible favor-doers, we controlled for total facebook  friends. since the dataset has many zero responses (n=22;  those who did not get any responses), the number of  responses was recoded to a dummy variable to look at  difference between zero-response group and non-zero  response group (n=76; those with one or more respondent).  independent variable model1 model2   average  marginal  effect (sd)  average  marginal  effect (sd)  actual fb friends -.00 (.00) -.00 (.00)  f of asking help 1.87* (.91) 1.78* (.86)  sri 1.23 (1.14) 1.36 (1.15)  n of strategy .96* (.46) 1.02* (.46)  bridging social capital -1.97 (1.35)   bonding social capital .77 (.92)   new variables from bridging  social capital        outward-looking  -1.27 (1.13)     broader group  .50 (.86)     new people  -.90• (.52)  new variables from bonding  social capital        individual benefit  1.68* (.86)     collective action  -1.07 (.78)  constant 3.61 (.49) 3.63 (.48)  log-likelihood value -211.67 -208.46  pseudo r2 0.031* 0.018*  likelihood ratio  13.54 19.97  p-value 0.035* 0.045*  * p< 0.001, ‘***’ ; p< 0.01, ‘**’ ; p<0.05, ‘*’; p<0.10, ‘•’  * coefficients are from a marginal effect analysis of the  negative binomial regression.  table 5: negative binomial regression predicting number of  responses (n=98)  model 1 model 2  variables 1 2 3 4 5 6  variables 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  1 actual friends -       1 actual friends -          2 f of asking help .375** -      2 f of asking help .375** -         3 sri .387** .250** -     3 sri .387** .250** -        4 n of strategies .004 -.101 .204* -    4 n of strategies .004 -.101 .204 * -       5 bridging sc .213* .334** .504** .138 -   5 outward looking .129 .254** .334** .185 -      6 bonding sc .238* .195* .259** .128 .213* -  6 broader group .214* .278** .443** .168 .399** -             7 new people .127 .218* .351** -.067 .382** .284** -            8 individual benefit .164 .108 .184 .097 .147 .076 .046 -           9 collective action .241* .195* .307** .116 .196* .350** .052 .479** -  table 4. correlation matrices      session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 17


   as shown in table 6, the total number of rhetorical  strategies utilized and, specifically, the mention of the  university at which the study occurred, were positively  correlated to the number of response. this could be because  referencing a specific sub-cluster helps to reduce the cost  for that network in deciding whether they should respond or  not.  this is similar to the “uniqueness” dimension that has  been shown to be effective in reducing social loafing  [17].  for zero vs. non-zero comparison, the money  incentive mention strategy is related to the non-zero group.  this result implies that each strategy has a different rate of  responses, and the rhetorical strategies that are associated  with eliciting at least a single response are not the same as  those associated with eliciting more responses.   discussion  social capital is a useful framework for explicating the  value of our social networks, and consequently the value of  the socio-technical tools, such as facebook, that enable us  to better maintain these connections. we see two main ways  in which this study has expanded our understanding of the  intersection of social capital and social computing systems.   first, because social capital comprises a vast set of  communication practices, resources, and structures within a  social network [7], this study captures a specific outcome of  social capital that is available to all members of one’s  network: getting a small favor from a facebook friend. we  asked our participants to request a favor that anyone in their  network could provide and then used the number of  responses as an outcome of social capital. second, we  examine a common framework for understanding different  types of social capital, bridging and bonding, and extend  those concepts to include more nuances of that framework.  we used williams’ [33] survey items which tap into  individuals’ perceptions of bridging and bonding social  capital, but also examine the sub-dimensions of the  williams’ [33] measures as potentially important predictors  of relational outcomes and online behavior.  first, we examined the relationship between perceived  social capital and the number of responses to a favor  request using both measures of social capital: the original  bridging and bonding scales, as well as the sub-dimensions  of social capital developed through factor analysis guided  by the conceptual distinctions articulated in williams work.  the relationship between favors and social capital was  insignificant when using the standard bridging and bonding  scales, so h1 was not supported. however, we found an  interesting answer to rq1, which asked “how do different  dimensions of social capital relate to the number of  responses to a favor request? we found a significant  relationship between the number of responses and one  “revised” sub-dimension (individual benefit) of bonding  social capital when we examined the more granular sub- dimension measures.   given the cross-sectional nature of these data, we don’t  have empirical evidence that clearly illustrates why these  differences might be occurring. based on burt’s [7] work  on the importance of communication behaviors in  generating social capital, it could be that users who perceive  higher levels of the individual benefit sub-dimension of  bonding social capital are more likely to interact with their  networks in ways that are able to generate more responses  to favors. the type of favor requested may be another factor  to consider. filling out the survey is a simple task or favor  that anyone can perform, as opposed to a task requiring  more time, effort, expertise, or other resources.  among the sub-dimensions of bridging social capital, there  was a significant relationship between meeting new people  and the number of favor-doers, but this was a negative  association. those who were more likely to perceive  facebook as an ideal place to interact with new people  received fewer responses to their favor requests, perhaps  because they were more likely to use the site as a way to  interact with new and different kinds of people but not as a  place to build up stores of reciprocal interactions with the  same individuals over time.   the number of actual facebook friends and signals of  relational investment (sri) were not significantly related to  the number of responses received, such that h2 and h3  were not supported. this was unexpected given previous  work identifying a link between these variables and  perceived social capital, and points to the importance of  employing other measures. because the favor required little  time investment, expertise, or familiarity with the favor  requestor and thus could be completed by anyone in one’s  facebook network, it may be that “actual” friends were not  important for this instance, although we would expect that  sri and actual friends might be associated with other kinds  of informational or emotional support – instances in which  more intimate knowledge of the support requestor is  necessary to respond.  we also found that participants who reported a higher level  of frequency of asking for help from their facebook friends  were more likely to get a higher number of responses from  their facebook networks (rq2). asking questions and  favors of one’s network may be a way to utilize the “social  lubrication” components of the site by engaging in  strategy  (yes=1)  n of  responses  zero vs. non- zero responses  (zero=0)  thanks in advance  .02 -.08  signal of brevity  .02 -.13  research study/science  .18 .05  university mention  .25* .15  spam disclaimer  .07 -.06  money incentive mentioned  .13 .24*  total n of strategies used .28* .06  table 6: partial correlation between strategies and  continuous and binary coding of responses.   session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 18


   interaction with one’s network. additionally, individuals  who frequently ask for help from their facebook networks  may be more skilled at framing their requests in ways that  elicit more responses. future research should explore these  potential explanations using other methods.  implications for practice  we have shown that different types of perceptions of social  capital can lead to different outcomes in terms of using a  site like facebook to ask for favors. work in this area can  help practitioners understand how they might construct  tools that allow for relationship maintenance in such a way  as to evoke the different aspects of social capital explicated  here. for example, designers interested in supporting  individual benefit effects for their users might provide tools  that make instances of exchanged favors between other  users more visible, or that help emphasize requests for help  over other types of messages in the system.  limitations  as with any work based on facebook interactions, specific  features of the system may influence our results. because  facebook’s edge rank algorithm selects which content  appears in friends’ news feeds, we do not know how  many people saw the requests posted by our participants  [2]. the reasons why some requests were more successful  than others were most likely affected by the variables we  measure here, but also may have influenced by their  visibility in the news feed of our participants’ networks.  as with other work similar to this, we are looking at  relationships between variables, and do not have evidence  of causal relationships.  additionally, those friends who did  see the favor requests may have been deterred from  completing the survey because after clicking the link to the  survey, they were directed to a facebook application page  that required them to “allow” or “deny” the application to  download some basic data about them before continuing to  the survey. we believe that this extra step may have  reduced the number of responses received to the favor  requests – albeit across all participants – as these  applications are often associated with privacy risks to users  [1].  future research utilizing a similar design should forego  the use of a facebook application.  the task we chose, asking members of the network to fill  out a survey, likely carries dependencies that would be  different had another task been used.  capturing instances  of social capital conversion in action has been a challenge  for researchers in this area, and given the likely effects of  the form of the favors that mark social capital conversion,  more work needs to be done in this area.   conclusion  social capital is a way of framing positive outcomes from  engagement with a social network, including contexts in  which one’s social network is mediated by information and  communication technologies. past scholarship on social  network sites has articulated how the affordances of these  socio-technical systems can shape the generation and  expression of social capital [24]. sub-dimensions of social  capital allow for a better matching between technical and  social affordances. in this paper, we’ve shown that social  capital is multi-dimensional, and that different aspects of  this concept may be associated with different types of  outcomes in socio-technical systems.  social capital has  proven to be a useful concept in understanding how  technologies support relationships, and we are hopeful that  expanding our understanding of this concept will lead to  future insights regarding the design, deployment, and  effects of socio- technical systems such as facebook.  acknowledgments  this material is based upon work supported by the national  science foundation under grant no. 0916019. jessica  vitak and brandon brooks assisted with data collection.  references  1. besmer, a., lipford, h.r., shehab, m. and cheek, g.  social applications: exploring a more secure framework  proceedings of the 5th symposium on usable privacy  and security, acm, mountain view, california, 2009,  1-10.  2. bosworth, a. news feed is a robot facebook blog,  2007.  3. bourdieu, p. the forms of capital. in richardson, j.g.  ed. handbook of theory and research for the sociology  of education greenwood, new york, 1986, 241-258.  4. burke, m., joyce, e., kim, t., anand, v. and kraut, r.  introductions and requests: rhetorical strategies that  elicit response in online communities.  third  international conference on communities and  technologies., 2007.  5. burke, m., kraut, r. and marlow, c., social capital on  facebook: differentiating uses and users. in chi,  (vancouver, bc, canada, 2011), new york: acm.  6. burke, m., marlow, c. and lento, t., social network  activity and social well-being. in 28th international  conference on human factors in computing systems,  (atlanta, 2010), new york: acm.  7. burt, r.s. neighbor networks: competitive advantage  local and personal. . oxford university press, oxford,  2009.  8. coleman, j.s. social capital in the creation of human  capital. the american journal of sociology, 94. 95-120.  9. donath, j.s. signals in social supernets. journal of  computer-mediated communication, 13. 231-251.  10. ellison, n., steinfield, c. and lampe, c. connection  strategies: social capital implications of facebook- enabled communication practices. new media &  society.  11. ellison, n., vitak, j., gray, r., lampe, c. and brooks,  b. cultivating social resources on facebook: signals of  session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 19


   relational investment and their role in social capital  processes ics-oii 2011 “a decade in internet time”  symposium. , oxford, uk, 2011.  12. ferlander, s. the importance of different forms of social  capital for health. acta sociologica, 50 (2). 115-128.  13. kobayashi, t. bridging social capital in online  communities: heterogeneity and social tolerance of  online game players in japan. human communication  research, 36 (4). 546-569.  14. lampe, c., ellison, n. and steinfield, c., a familiar  face(book): profile elements as signals in an online  social network. in acm chi 2007 conference on  human factors in computing systems (2007), new  york: acm, 435-444.  15. lampe, c., vitak, j., gray, r. and ellison, n.,  perceptions of facebook's value as an information  source in 30th international conference on human  factors in computing systems (chi), (austin, tx,  2012), acm press.  16. lin, n., cook, k.s. and burt, r.s. social capital :  theory and research. aldine de gruyter, new york,  2001.  17. ling, k., beenen, g., ludford, p., wang, x., chang, k.,  li, x., cosley, d., frankowski, d., terveen, l., rashid,  a.m., resnick, p. and kraut, r. using social  psychology to motivate contributions to online  communities. journal of computer-mediated  communication, 10 (4).  18. morris, m.r., teevan, j. and panovich, k., what do  people ask their social networks, and why? a survey  study of status message q&a behavior. in proceedings  of the 28th international conference on human factors  in computing systems, (atlanta, georgia, usa, 2010),  acm.  19. panciera, k., priedhorsky, r., erickson, t. and terveen,  l. lurking? cyclopaths?: a quantitative lifecycle  analysis of user behavior in a geowiki proceedings of  the 28th international conference on human factors in  computing systems, acm, atlanta, georgia, usa, 2010.  20. papacharissi, z. and mendelson, a. toward a new(er)  sociability: uses, gratifications and social capital on  facebook. in papathanassopoulos, s. ed. media  perspectives for the 21st century, routledge, new tork,  2011, 212-230.  21. portes, a. social capital: its origins and applications in  modern sociology. annual review of sociology, 22. 1- 24.  22. putnam, r. bowling alone: the collapse and revival of  american community. simon & schuster, new york,  2000.  23. resnick, p. beyond bowling together: socio-technical  capital. in carroll, j. ed. hci in the new millennium,  addison-wesley, new york, ny, 2001, 647-672.  24. smock, a.d., ellison, n.b., lampe, c. and wohn, d.y.  facebook as a toolkit: a uses and gratification approach  to unbundling feature use. computers in human  behavior, 27 (6). 2322-2329.  25. stefanone, m.a., kwon, k.h. and lackaff, d.  exploring the relationship between perceptions of social  capital and enacted support online. journal of  computer-mediated communication.  26. steinfield, c., dimicco, j.m., ellison, n.b. and lampe,  c., bowling online: social networking and social capital  within the organization. in fourth international  conference on communities and technologies, (2009),  new york: acm, 245-254.  27. steinfield, c., ellison, n.b. and lampe, c. social  capital, self-esteem, and use of online social network  sites: a longitudinal analysis. journal of applied  developmental psychology, 29. 434-445.  28. tabachnick, b.g. and fidell, l.s. using multivariate  statistics. allyn and bacon, new york, 2007.  29. teevan, j., morris, m.r. and panovich, k. factors  affecting response quantity, quality, and speed for  questions asked via social network status messages.  icwsm, 2011.  30. trochim, w. the research methods knowledge base.  cornell university press, new york, 2001.  31. valenzuela, s., park, n. and kee, k. is there social  capital in a social network site?: facebook use and  college students' life satisfaction, trust, and participation.  journal of computer-mediated communication, 14.  875-901.  32. williams, d. the impact of time online: social capital  and cyberbalkanization. cyberpsychology & behavior,  10 (3). 398-406.  33. williams, d. on and off the 'net: scales for social  capital in an online era. journal of computer-mediated  communication, 11. 593-628.  34.yang, z.l., and peterson, r.t. customer perceived  value, satisfaction, and loyalty: the role of switching  costs, psychology and marketing, 21(10). 799-822.   session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 20
