

cars, calls, and cognition:                                        investigating driving and divided attention  shamsi t. iqbal, yun-cheng ju, and eric horvitz   microsoft research   one microsoft way, redmond, wa 98052   {shamsi, yuncj, horvitz}@microsoft.com    abstract  conversing on cell phones while driving an automobile is a  common practice. we examine the interference of the  cognitive load of conversational dialog with driving tasks,  with the goal of identifying better and worse times for  conversations during driving. we present results from a  controlled study involving 18 users using a driving  simulator. the driving complexity and conversation type  were manipulated in the study, and performance was  measured for factors related to both the primary driving  task and secondary conversation task. results showed  significant interactions between the primary and secondary  tasks, where certain combinations of complexity and  conversations were found especially detrimental to driving.  we present the studies and analyses and relate the findings  to prior work on multiple resource models of cognition. we  discuss how the results can frame thinking about policies  and technologies aimed at enhancing driving safety.    author keywords  driving, attention, dual task performance, cell phones  acm classification keywords  h5.m. information interfaces and presentation (e.g., hci):  miscellaneous.   general terms  experimentation, human factors, measurements  introduction  driving automobiles is often perceived as a fluid, nearly  automatic process, and drivers often engage in secondary  activities while driving [1, 7, 8, 31, 32].  although some  peripheral tasks are rapid and require only momentary shifts  in attention from the primary driving task [10], other   secondary activities may require more time and effort, and  can lead to prolonged periods of divided attention [15, 23].   with the proliferation of mobile devices and people’s desire  to remain connected, talking on the phone, reviewing email,  and even composing email messages and texting while  driving have become commonplace. the cognitive, visual,  and physical demands of such tasks can compromise the  primary task of driving.  users may often overestimate their  ability to divide their attention with secondary tasks  because of the sense that driving is near automatic in many  situations and can thus be safely shared with other tasks.   however, it may be difficult to switch full attention back to  driving in a timely manner so as to observe and respond  appropriately when driving challenges arise, and such  attentional challenges can have costly consequences [18].  the data linking the use of phones while driving to  increases in accidents and fatalities has sparked legislation  aimed at limiting cell phone usage during driving to hands- free configurations. however recent research has shown  that using devices in a hands-free manner is no less harmful  than the use of handheld devices [16]. thus, phone use  would have to be stopped entirely to avoid the challenge  they present to driving safety. unfortunately, people are  unlikely to give up phone interactions while driving, and  complete bans of phone use in this setting are unlikely.  our goal is to better understand the interference between  the cognition tapped for phone conversations and for driv- ing. insights about such potential interference would help to  characterize better and worse times for phone conversations  during driving, highlighting when drivers could more safely  engage in phone conversations if absolutely needed. as a  first step, we set out to understand how different types of  cell phone conversations during varying levels of driving  engagement affects driving performance and also the per- formance of the driver on the call itself.  we sought to un- derstand the findings in terms of interactions between cog- nitive resources used in driving and in handling common  secondary tasks associated with phone conversations.  we conducted a controlled study with 18 participants  driving within an interactive driving simulator.  the  participants drove on routes composed of segments that  posed different types of navigation challenges. while  driving, the participants would occasionally have to respond  to a cell phone call, pushing a button to initiate a hands-free  interaction. the cell phone calls were one of three kinds of  engagement: listen to news and facts (assimilate), answer  questions (retrieve), and provide directions (generate). in  addition, for each driving trial, we asked drivers to either  focus mainly on their driving, on the conversation, or do  their best to both drive and handle the phone-based tasks.   permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  chi 2010, april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, georgia, usa.  copyright 2010 acm  978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00.  chi 2010: driving, interrupted april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1281


  not surprisingly, we found that drivers perform better on  simpler routes than on complex routes when they are  engaged in phone tasks.  drives on the simpler routes were  associated with a lower incidence of collisions, sudden  braking, and missed turns. we also found that specific types  of phone conversations interfere more significantly with  driving, presumably because task requirements and  chunking associated with the calls interferes with cognition  that is relied upon for driving.  we discuss how certain  tasks may steal attention from the driving task and/or make  demands in other ways on the cognitive resources that are  used in controlling and navigating a car.     related work  we first discuss research on the ability of people to handle  concurrent tasks. we focus on prior research and reflection  within cognitive psychology on the allocation of attention  in dual-task settings.    divided attention and dual-task challenges  from the perspective of multiple resource theory (mrt)  of cognition [36], humans harness varying quantities of  different kinds of cognitive resources (e.g., short- and long- term memory, attention, reasoning, etc.) to solve problems.  in dual-task settings, people are challenged with completing  two distinct tasks, creating potential contention for  cognitive resources required to solve each one.  it has been  demonstrated that shifting resources from one task to  another can improve the performance on the second task  [25, 27], and as the difficulty of one task increases, the  performance on the other decreases [38]. mrt further  suggests that, for concurrent tasks, performance on both  may be maintained if the tasks are in separate processing  stages (e.g., response selection versus perceptual activities),  or involve different processing mechanisms (e.g., spatial  and analog information versus verbal and linguistic  information) [36, 38]. finally, the theory of automaticity  proposed by william james suggests multiple processes can  go on simultaneously, when they are habitual, involving  minimal conscious control [17]. while automaticity can be  obtained through training and practice [22, 33], its success  also depends on consistency of the task [12].  introduction of a second task has been shown to impact  performance in many dual-task contexts.  basic research on  performance in rarified dual-task settings has been done in  studies of shared attention in visual search [1].  however, it  is not clear if results demonstrated on low-level dual-task  challenge problems, formulated and studied in psychology  labs, holds for switches between higher-level and more  complex tasks (e.g., switching from driving to attending to  a cell phone call) and how well attention can be selectively  allocated, or divided across these two tasks. pursuing such  an understanding is the main thrust of this work.     the prior work on dual-task challenges provides a useful  framing for research on performance tradeoffs in the setting  of driving a car while talking on the phone or interacting  with an in-vehicle system [16, 21]. while a seasoned driver  may show an overriding automaticity in piloting a vehicle,  driving a car demands resources associated with visual  perception, spatial working memory, and motor responses  and coordination [19, 37]. performing secondary tasks may  draw on resources used during driving [24], which may lead  to performance degradations in one or both tasks.  we study commonplace dual-task situations that people  face when they engage in phone conversations while  driving. different types of conversations may engage  different mixes of cognitive, spatial, and verbal resources  that may compete in different ways with the challenges of  driving as well as the structural nature of the conversations.  in this research, we study the interaction of classes of  conversational tasks that we characterize broadly as  assimilation, retrieval, and generation. our goal is to  understand how these different types of conversational  tasks conflict with driving and to identify whether certain  combinations of driving challenge and conversation tasks  are associated with increased or diminished risk.  effects of performing secondary tasks while driving  dual-task scenarios of driving and performing secondary  tasks such as conversing on the phone, texting, interacting  with in-vehicle controls has been an area of active research.  studies have shown that dialing or answering the phone,  adjusting the radio or interacting with music players have  negative influences on driving, [7, 8, 32], as well as  reasoning and conversing during driving [9] .   using phones during driving has been shown to have  catastrophic effects.  for example, drivers with phones have  slower braking reaction time [1, 20], have impaired steering  control [8], and are more likely to have an accident [29, 35].  moreover, no value of hands-free phones has been found,  debunking beliefs that removing the need to physically hold  phones reduces distraction during driving [29, 34]. these  findings reinforce the hypothesis that cognitive demands of  multitasking play a more important role in distracting  drivers than manual manipulation [28, 34].   in order to understand the effects of cognitive demands on  driving, researchers have looked at performance on various  secondary tasks known to cause memory load in prior  psychology studies. these include working memory tasks  [1], mental arithmetic tasks [7] , and reasoning tasks [9].  although not entirely representative of conversations that  one may have over the phone, these tasks were used as they  may replicate the cognitive demands placed on drivers  while participating in more natural conversational settings.  performance on driving was reduced in all cases.  we reexamine the influence of phone conversations on  driving, and also explore how phone conversations are af- fected by driving. we compare performance across differ- ent types of conversation while driving on courses with dif- ferent levels of difficulty. also, we investigate how varying  levels of attention allocation across driving and phone con- versations affect performance. while others have investi- gated several of these factors or partial combinations, prior  research has not explored the interactions in a joint manner  as we do in experiments reviewed below.    chi 2010: driving, interrupted april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1282


strategies for interleaving secondary tasks with driving  given that people can perform two tasks concurrently [36],  researchers have recently looked at opportunities to inter- leave secondary tasks with driving. brumby et al. investi- gated how interleaving a phone dialing task with driving  impacted lane keeping and the dialing time under condi- tions of requests to prioritize either driving or dialing [10].  results showed that when asked to prioritize the secondary  task, drivers chunk components of the secondary task and  switch back to driving at chunk boundaries to maintain  driving performance, and while focusing on driving, the  secondary task is slowed down. in a related study, brumby  et al. showed that the fastest strategy for selecting a song on  a music player while driving was to scroll in one contiguous  block without returning attention to the primary task of  driving. for the safest strategy, more time needs to be given  to the driving task, at the cost of longer response times for  the secondary task, and correspondingly longer stretches of  times for the dual-task scenario [11].    the prior work suggests that, for automatized tasks like  driving, it may be possible to formulate strategies to per- form other tasks without significantly compromising driv- ing. successful dual-task scenarios will depend on the  availability and requirements of cognitive resources for the  secondary task in light of resource consumption by the pri- mary task and opportunities for interleaving the two tasks.  we explore performance in these scenarios by generating  phone calls with different cognitive demands during driving  situations of different difficulties. we probe the interaction  of cognitive resources for driving and handling calls via the  proxy of measuring performance on both the driving and  call tasks. we reflect about the timing and nature of conver- sations that conflict the least with driving and propose strat- egies for minimizing interference.   overview of study  our goal was to explore if and when opportunities exist  when car drivers could engage in phone conversations  without reducing driving performance, to understand which  conversational tasks cause the most interference with driv- ing, and the influence of increases in driving difficulty on  interference between the primary and secondary tasks.   understanding performance of driving on conversation has  not been well studied.  we also investigated how well users  can carry out the conversation and how much they can re- call afterwards.  we addressed the following questions:  1. how is driving performance affected by participating in  phone conversations where the driver has to interact in  varying levels of engagement? how do these effects  vary with changes in driving difficulty?  2. how are phone conversations influenced by  concurrently driving, and how do these effects vary with  changes in the levels of driving difficulty?  3. how does performance vary with requests to prioritize  attention on driving, conversation, or both tasks?  to answer these questions, we conducted a controlled study  using a driving simulator (see figure 1). using the simula- tor, users engaged in driving a realistic route, with a realis- tic steering wheel, pedals, and controls. custom software  allowed researchers to design driving scenarios and log re- levant parameters during driving. to simulate a hands-free  phone call environment, calls were presented through a pe- ripheral system including a loud speaker and a microphone,  and calls were accepted via a button on the driving console.   experimental design  the study was designed as a 3 (driving complexity) x 3  (call type) x 3 (focus) repeated measures within subjects  design. possible effects of order were countered by block- ing the factors on a fully balanced latin square design.  users   18 people participated in our study (f=3), recruited through  a call sent out to people selected randomly from the entire  employee pool of our organization. the mean age of par- ticipants was 33.2 years, (s.d.=8.2) with a mean of 16.8  years of driving experience (s.d.= 9.41). all participants  reported to be comfortable talking on the phone while driv- ing.   driving task  participants drove routes comprised of multiple 30s seg- ments, each segment having either of the following three  levels of complexity: simple, complex, and unexpected oc- currences. an example of a simple segment is a single  stretch of driving on a relatively empty road. complex  segments involve driving with many cars on a road, and re- quires changes of speed or lane changing.  a segment with  unexpected occurrences includes sudden, unexpected  events, e.g., the car in front of the driver’s car suddenly  braking, a pedestrian stepping into the road, or an object  rolling in front of the car. the segments with unexpected  occurrences include time for the driver to recover and re- sume safe driving. routes were about 10 minutes long.  drivers were asked to follow the route straight on, unless  they saw instructions to turn left or right. instructions ap- peared in large banners in the frontal view of the driver and  were easy to see if drivers were looking at the road.  to preserve the order of driving complexity as dictated by  the latin square design, we randomly chose segments  where users would receive phone calls. complexities were    figure 1: the stisim driving simulator. the system hosts a  console with a steering wheel, turn signals, and buttons mapped  to external functions. three 47” screens placed at roughly 45 o   generate a convincing impression of driving a vehicle.  chi 2010: driving, interrupted april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1283


  assigned to these segments according to the latin square.  for consistency, segments with no phone calls were as- signed difficulty levels randomly. this procedure reduced  the probability that users would be able to predict phone  calls on any given segment.  phone tasks  while driving, participants would occasionally receive  phone calls, heralded by a traditional phone ring tone.  pressing the respond button on the console would mark the  start of the conversation. the phone task was selected ac- cording to the design and launched. participants had 30  seconds to perform the task.   phone tasks belonged to one of the three categories:  assimilation, retrieval, and generation (table 1). the  categories were designed based on prior studies looking at  decrements of performance in driving while drivers engage  in secondary tasks (see, e.g., [34]). in distinction to the  prior work, we designed the tasks so as to resemble  conversations that one typically may have over the phone.   for the assimilation task, the participants listened to a 15- 20 second news headline. the choice of this task was moti- vated by strayer and johnston’s [34] book-on-tape task,  where participants were instructed to listen so that they  could answer post-experiment questions. for the retrieval  task, participants were asked to answer two questions, simi- lar to questions one may hear from a telemarketer. for the  generation task, participants were asked to provide driving  directions between two points of interest. the first two  tasks were designed to exploit verbal and linguis- tic/semantic resources. the third task adds more explicit  spatial reasoning challenges to the mix.   methodology  on arrival to the lab, participants were first guided through  an informed consent process. they were then given an  overview of the study. the experimenter then gave a  demonstration of the controls of the driving simulator and  the participant was provided with 10 minutes of practice  driving to become accustomed to the system. participants  were also interrupted with practice phone calls during the  practice session. participants were then started with the  study. to provide baseline data, users first performed only  the phone tasks, without driving.  they then went through a  route of driving, without any phone interruptions.   participants then drove 3 routes where for each route they  received 9 phone interruptions, 3 for each phone call type.  each call type was paired with each driving complexity, ac- cording to the latin square design. to measure perform- ance on the phone tasks, participants filled out a short ques- tionnaire at the end of each route, designed to test recall of  the content of the phone conversations. to reduce work- load, we provided multiple choices when users were asked  to select topics pertaining to the phone conversations.   for each route, participants were asked to distribute their  attention across the two tasks according to the following  focus (focus more on driving, focus more on phone  conversation, focus on both considering them to be equally  important). focus was assigned based on the latin square.  prior studies have shown that asking users specifically to  focus on one task over another in dual-task experiments  involving driving can yield different outcomes [10, 21].  the experimental session lasted about 1.5 hours. users  came back for two more sessions, where the experimental  factors were varied according to the latin square design to  correct for ordering effects. in summary, each participant  drove 9 routes and answered 81 phone calls over 3 sessions.  measures  performance for both driving and the phone tasks were  measured for route segments when users were answering a  phone call while driving. for driving performance, we  measured the number of collisions, missed turns, and sud- den braking, and driving speed while talking on the phone.  we also recorded the same measures when users were driv- ing while not engaged in a phone call, as a way of measur- ing baseline performance. the values were automatically  recorded by the simulator.  for performance on the phone task, we measured the ability  to correctly identify topics in the phone conversation. as an  indicator of how users attempt to modulate the conversation  to ensure driving safety, we also tracked the time partici- pants took to respond to the ringing of an incoming phone  call, and analyzed the prosodic content of their utterances  through measuring the mean length of silent segments.   results  for the baseline condition, each user provided 3 data points  per phone task, totaling 9 data points per user. for the ex- perimental condition, each user provided 3 data points for  each of the (driving complexity (3) x call type (3) x fo- cus (3)) conditions, totaling 81 data points per user and a  grand total of 1,620 data points.   effects on driving  the overall rates of occurrences of events characterizing  driving performance (collisions, missed turns, sudden  brakes etc) were low. just as distractions do not always lead  to catastrophic outcomes in real life, we saw small numbers  of costly events with the simulator, similar to findings de- scribed in [34].  however, we sought to investigate the ex- treme cases of when such events occur, and how much they  are affected by the factors (focus, driving complexity, and  call type) explored in this experiment. because of the com- plexity of the experimental design, for each dependent fac- phone   task type example  assimilation  (listen only)  a 16 year old in ny recently was texting  while walking and fell into an open manhole.  retrieval  (respond)  when did you last have the oil changed in  your car?  generation  (respond)  please give directions from your home to  the nearest grocery.  table 1: examples of phone based task categories.  chi 2010: driving, interrupted april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1284


tor, we will analyze first the three-way interactions (if ap- plicable), then the two-way interactions between call type  and driving complexity for each level of focus, and finally  the effects of call types for each level of driving complex- ity. as the length of the call varied by type, we will report  on the events/minute to normalize comparisons across call  types. we use α=0.0125 to control for type 1 errors.   collisions  a collision was recorded when the user hit a car, an object,  or a pedestrian. overall, the rate of collisions/min in the ex- perimental conditions (with phone calls) was significantly  higher than in the baseline condition (no phone calls)  (t(17)=5.19, p<0.0001). for the experimental routes, num- ber of collisions were low overall, occurring in only 53 out  of 1458 phone calls (excluding the baseline phone calls). a  univariate anova with collisions/min as the dependent  factor showed a significant 3-way interaction between fo- cus, driving complexity and call type (f(8, 1432)=7.532,  p<0.0001). see figure 2(a) for breakdowns of colli- sions/min across the three factors.   for cases where focus was driving, collisions/min did not  vary significantly based on either call type or driving  complexity. however, when focus was both, significant in- teraction effects were found between driving complexity  and call type (f(4, 481) =10.5 p<0.0001). post hoc bon- ferroni tests showed that for these cases, when the driving  complexity was unexpected, significantly higher numbers  of collisions/min occurred (m=0.34) compared to simple  (m=0, p<0.0001).  collisions/min during unexpected were  also higher than complex (m=0.1), but the differences did  not reach significance (p<0.024). within each type of driv- ing complexity for the both condition, we then ran follow  up test to explore effects of different call types. there  were no significant differences in collisions/min for differ- ent call types for simple or complex. for unexpected, re- trieval caused significantly higher number of collisions/min  (m=0.998), compared to assimilation (m=0, p<0.0001) and  generation (m=0, p<0.0001).   when the focus was conversing, significant interaction ef- fects were also found between call type and driving com- plexity. post hoc tests showed that for these cases, complex  resulted in significantly higher number of collisions/min  (m=0.425) compared to simple (m=0.035, p<0.002). it is  possible that the sustained attention required while driving  on complex routes is affected when users are focusing  mostly on conversing, thereby impacting the number of col- lisions. follow up tests showed no significant differences  across call types for any of the complexity levels.  failing to follow instructions to turn  instructions to turn left or right were provided in real time  via road signs. across the 18 users, 8.3% of the instructed  turns (61/733) were missed or wrongly taken (e.g. taking a  left turn instead of a right and vice versa), resulting from  failing to properly notice the road signs instructing the turn.  the rate of missed turns during phone calls were signifi- cantly higher than the rate of missed turns during the base- line condition of no phone calls (t(17)=8.357, p<0.0001). a  univariate anova with missed turns/min as the dependent  factor showed a significant three-way interaction among  focus, driving complexity and call type (f(7,  733)=10.65. p<0.0001), see figure 2(b) for details.  overall, focusing on both caused users to miss significantly  lower number of turns/min (m=0.23) compared to driving  (m=1.68, p<0.0001) and conversing (m=1.357, p<0.0001)    call type    assimilation   retrieval    generation     a)  b)    c)    d)    figure 2. mean numbers of (a) collisions, (b) missed turns,  (c) sudden brakes, (d) average speed during calls, grouped by  requested focus. individual lines show missed turns by call  types, separated by driving complexity (x-axis).   chi 2010: driving, interrupted april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1285


  only. this alludes to the overall difficulty of switching at- tention back and forth from one task to the other when fo- cused primarily on either. separating out the levels of fo- cus, where focus was driving, there was a significant effect  of only driving complexity (f(2, 127)=18.35, p<0.0001);  complex caused more missed turns/min (m=3.75) compared  to simple (m=0.39, p<0.0001) and unexpected (m=0.46,  p<0.0001). there were no significant differences across the  different call types, suggesting that when focused on driv- ing, missed turns were affected more by road conditions ra- ther than the act of conversing.   no differences across call types or complexities were  found when focus was driving. when focus was both,  there was a significant interaction between call type and  driving complexity (f(4, 387) =4.3, p<0.002). followup  tests showed no overall differences in missed turns/min  across different complexities. however, post hoc tests ex- ploring the interaction revealed that for simple, retrieval  caused users to missed significantly more turns/min  (m=1.06) compared to assimilation (m=0.2, p<0.002) and  generation (m=0. p<0.0001). no other effects were found.  focusing on conversing also revealed a significant interac- tion between call type and complexity (f(4,193)  =19.3,  p<0.0001). across all complexities, assimilation caused  more missed turns/min (ms= 3.5, mc=1.4, mu=6.8,  p<0.0001 for all) than retrieval (ms=0,  mc=0.36, mu=0)  and generation (ms=0.2, mc=0, mu=0).  this finding sug- gests that the act of solely listening causes the user to miss  written instructions.   sudden brakes  the rate of sudden brakes during phone calls was signifi- cantly higher than in the baseline condition (t(17)=5.154,  p<0.0001). there were a total of 96 sudden brakes across  the 18 users, and 55 of them happened during a phone call.  a significant three-way interaction was found between fo- cus, driving complexity and call type (f(8, 1432)=4.173,  p<0.0001). see figure 2(c).   as with collisions, there was no significant effect of focus  on sudden brakes/min. however, two-way interactions  were found between call type and complexity when focus  was driving (f (4, 466) =4.5 p<0.0014) and when focus  was both ( f(4, 472) =3.8   p<0.005;    ). follow up tests  showed that for both of these focus levels, unexpected  caused higher number of sudden brakes (md=0.38,  mb=0.31) compared to both simple (md=0.08, p<0.006;  mb=0, p<0.0001) and complex (md=0.03, p<0.0001; mb=0,  p<0.0001), accounting for 49 out of the 55 sudden brakes.  further followup tests showed significant effects of call  types on sudden brakes/min only while focusing on both.  retrieval while focusing on both caused more sudden  brakes/min (m=0.7) compared to assimilation (m=0.2,  p<0.005). no other differences were found.   driving speed  we examined driving speeds in the phone call and no phone  call conditions. overall, average speed during phone calls  were significantly lower than the average speed when there  were no phone calls (t(17)=3.45, p<0.003). again, a signifi- cant three-way interaction was found between focus, driv- ing complexity and call type (f(8, 1421)=4.17,  p<0.0001). see figure 2(d).   overall, users drove faster while focusing on driving  (m=38.7 mph) compared to conversing (m=35.7 mph,  p<0.0001) and both (m=33.8 mph, p<0.0001). note that  trying to focus on both resulted in the lowest speed, indicat- ing the difficulty in maintaining continual performance on  both driving and talking on the phone, and corresponding  correction by the user by reducing driving speed.   across all three levels of focus, speed was significantly  higher for simple (md=48.3, mb=42.9, mc=41.2, p<0.0001  for all pairs but one) compared to complex (md=37.1;  mb=31.7, mc=39.1 (not significantly different)) and unex- pected (md=30.8, mb=27.1, mc=27.1). speed for complex  was also significantly higher than unexpected (p<0.0001 for  all pairs). for each level of focus, significant two-way in- teractions were found between call type and driving com- plexity (fdriving(4, 472)=5.5, p<0.0002; fboth(4, 474)=11.14,   p<0.0001; fconversing(4, 475)=14.9, p<0.0001 ). when focus was  driving, unexpected resulted in lowering of driving speed  during retrieval (m=24.2, p<0.0001 for all pairs) compared  to assimilation (m=32.5) and generation (m=35.8). when  focus was both, both simple and complex resulted in lower- ing in driving speed during retrieval (ms=39.4, mc=31.3)  and generation (ms=40.2, mc=23) compared to assimilation  (ms=49.02, mc=40.6, p<0.0001 for all pairs), while unex- pected resulted in retrieval causing significant lowering of  speed (mu=23.4) compared to generation (mu=30.2,  p<0.0002). when focus was conversing, complex resulted  in generation causing more reduction in speed (m=29.6,  p<0.0001 for both pairs) compared to both retrieval  (m=46.5) and assimilation (m=41.1). on the other hand,  unexpected resulted in generation causing less reduction in  speed (m=31.1) compared to both retrieval (m=24.9) and  assimilation (m=25.2), p<0.0001 for both pairs. these  numbers allude to the difficulty in dividing attention across  the tasks of conversing, retrieving and generating informa- tion, the visual-spatial task of driving and the skillful main- tenance of speed. however, as discussed before, being en- gaged in a complex secondary task that conflicts with the  driving task in an obvious way may lead drivers to modu- late driving speed in an attempt to ensure safe driving.   influence of driving on conversations and related tasks  we also studied effects of driving on the performance of the  conversations and actions associated with them. since this  was a dual-task scenario where the phone task would likely  be foregrounded, we wanted to understand how concurrent  driving influences conversational performance.  time to respond to calls  time to respond to calls was measured as the time between  the initiation of the phone ringing and the time the user hit  the button, depending on how difficult it was to switch at- tention from driving to the phone call. the time to respond  to a phone call while driving was significantly higher  chi 2010: driving, interrupted april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1286


(m=2.5s,), compared to the baseline condition (m=1.52s,  f(1,1608)=55.37, p<0.0001 ). these differences indicate  the difficulty in switching attention from driving to re- sponding to the phone call, where users often attempted to  reach a safe state in driving before initiating the call.  a univariate anova showed main effects of focus (f(2,  1431)=53.3 , p<0.0001), and driving complexity (f(2,  1431)=18.32, p< 0.0001) on response time (fig. 3). there  were no interactions between the two. we ignore call types  for this analysis as the user did not know before responding  to the call what type of conversation it would entail.  as expected, when the requested focus was on driving, re- sponse time was highest compared to the situations of fo- cusing on both (p<0.0001) and  more on phone calls  (p<0.0001). response times for situations where the re- quested focus was more on phone calls were lower than  when the focus was on both driving and phone calls  (p<0.0001). these results are in line with the expected dif- ficulties associated with disengaging from driving to re- spond to the call; when focused more on driving, it took  more time to switch than when prioritizing the cell phone  conversation. interestingly, prioritizing both tasks leads to  response times that are not as high as the case when drivers  were focused more on driving, nor as low as when focusing  on the calls, indicating that there is some tradeoff in rapid- ity of response perhaps indicating an attempt by drivers to  maintain driving safety.   for driving complexity, response times while facing an un- expected event while driving was significantly higher than  when driving on simple (p<0.0001) and complex (p<0.05).  response times when driving on a complex route were also  significantly higher than when driving on a simple route  (p<0.0001), again demonstrating the potential difficulty of  disengaging from a cognitively demanding situation (com- plex or unexpected event) to take a call.  recalling information from conversations  as a measure of how effectively users were able to pay at- tention to the phone conversations while driving, we ana- lyzed how much they could recall information about the  conversations in a questionnaire presented to them right af- ter finishing driving each route. the questionnaire asked  them to identify from within a set of distracters keywords  presented in the news headlines, topics addressed in the  demographic questions, and start and end points of the di- rections they were asked to provide in the conversations.   as displayed in figure 4, drivers had a higher number of  wrong answers for questions from the experimental condi- tion with phone calls (m=0.19) compared to the baseline  condition (m=0.12, f(1, 1618)=4.83, p<0.028). as with  driving performance, a significant three-way interaction on  wrong answers was found among focus, driving complex- ity, and call type (f(8, 1431)=6.3, p<0.0001).   focus influenced the number of wrong answers. when fo- cus was driving, the number of wrong answers (m=0.247)  was significantly higher than both (m=0.17, p<0.008) and  conversing (m=0.16, p<0.003). for all focus requests, there  were significant two-way interactions between call type  and driving complexity (fdriving(4, 477)=6.79 p<0.0001;   fboth(4, 477)=3.55, p<0.007;  fconversing(4, 477) =3.5,   p<0.008). when focus was driving, complex driving re- sulted in more wrong answers for assimilation (m=0.47)  compared to retrieval and generation (m=0.2, p<0.01 for  both). other differences were not significant. when focus  was both, simple driving resulted in more wrong answers  for assimilation (m=0.3, p<0.0009), and more wrong an- swers for generation (m=0.46, p<0.0001) compared to re- trieval (m=0.06). unexpected resulted in more wrong an- swers for generation (m=0.22) compared to assimilation  (m=0.04, p<0.01). when focus was conversing, unex- pected showed more wrong answers for assimilation  (m=0.4) compared to retrieval (m=0.09, p<0.001).   overall, focusing on driving resulted in reductions in accu- racy on the post-experiment test. answering questions on  assimilation appeared to be more difficult, and retrieval to    mainly driving    both     mainly conversing   focus      figure 3. mean time to respond to phone calls. individual  lines show missed turns by call types, separated by driving    call type    assimilation   retrieval    generation     figure 4. mean numbers of wrong answers, grouped by  requested focus. individual lines show missed turns by call  types, separated by driving complexity (x-axis).  chi 2010: driving, interrupted april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1287


  be the least problematic across the different conditions. the  former could be due to the difficulties in retaining minute  details of information delivered in a prosaic form. retrieval,  on the other hand, led to more detrimental effects in driving  performance; users may focused more intensively on re- trieval questions, sacrificing performance on driving to  achieve better performance on their responses.  prosodic analysis of drivers’ speech  we analyzed attributes of the speech of drivers during  phone conversations using specialized speech analysis  tools. we examined the length of silent segments in their  speech as a potential indicator of interleaving of attention or  interference between the driving task and conversation. as  the user did not speak in the assimilation tasks, we exclude  corresponding phone calls for this analysis.   there was a significant effect of focus on the mean length  of silent segments for each conversation (f(2, 938)=4.04,  p<0.018), but no effects of call type or complexity. post  hoc tests showed that silent segments were the longest  (m=0.093s) when focus was driving, significantly higher  than when focus was conversing (m=0.072s, p<0.012).  while no significant differences were found, the length of  the silent segments when focus was both was higher than  when focus was conversing, and lower than when focus  was driving (see figure 5). this finding may be interpreted  as evidence that when drivers are focused on driving, it may  be more difficult to disengage and switch to a call, and  drivers may perform more shifts in their attention to main- tain driving performance, resulting in increases in silent pe- riods in the conversation. the cognitive load associated  with difficulty in switching focus and generating utterances  may also contribute to the differences in the length of silent  segments [5].  summary of results  our findings provide compelling evidence for significant  degradations in both driving performance (collision, missed  turns, sudden braking, and reduction of speed) and conver- sation performance (response time to call, information re- call, and quality of speech) while driving and conversing  concurrently compared to the baseline conditions or either  driving or conversing on the phone. we provide evidence of  the complex interactions between varying levels of focus,  driving complexity and conversation type. overall, re- quested focus did not appear to have a major impact on  driving performance, as automaticity seemed to allow users  to drive and converse simultaneously. however, focus did  have a stronger effect on the performance on the conversa- tions. on receiving phone calls, users often attempted to  achieve a stable driving situation before continuing with the  conversation, which may explain the lengthier silent seg- ments. the more focused the user was on driving, the more  time it took them to switch to the phone call.   as expected, answering a phone call while driving on a  simple route resulted in the least collisions, the least slow- ing down in speed, and the least sudden braking, though the  rates were still higher than the baseline condition of no  phone calls. we found that conversations requiring infor- mation retrieval had the most negative influence on driving  performance.  this type of task was associated with the  most collisions during the occurrence of unexpected events  while driving, the most missed turns during simple driving,  the most sudden braking while focusing on both driving and  conversing, and the greatest reduction in speed during un- expected events. generation tasks caused users to slow  down driving during complex routes, suggesting that there  may be conflicts in visual-spatial resources that lead users  to compensate by lowering driving speed in an attempt to  maintain safer driving performance.  assimilation tasks  generally resulted in lower negative impact on driving per- formance perhaps because users did not have to provide re- sponses. however, recall of call information was poorer  than for other tasks, perhaps because of the need to remem- ber more precise details.  discussion  our findings highlight the difficulties in determining oppor- tune moments for engaging in calls based on the rich set of  experimental conditions that we explored. requests to users  to focus on calls versus on driving was an attempt to simu- late the real-world spectrum of attention to calls while driv- ing, depending on the nature of the engagement with a call- based conversation based on its perceived importance or sa- lience. we realize that the focus variable in the study is not  necessarily reliable as the test condition hinged on peoples’  voluntary intention, ability, and interpretation of the request  to focus in a particular way, versus the reality of what hap- pens in real-life settings. this was exemplified in our re- sults where focus was generally not shown to significantly  affect the performance measures.  we found that participants occasionally were able to attend  to each task effectively when confronted with one task  when asked to focus on the other, suggesting that drivers  may be interleaving the tasks. for example, even while  deeply engaged in a phone conversation, the drivers were  found to make subtle adjustments to their driving (e.g.,  reducing their driving speed to have more control) to  accommodate the conversation without compromising  figure 5. average mean length of silent segments in sec- onds, by level of focus.  chi 2010: driving, interrupted april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1288


safety. when focusing on driving, users were found to have  higher numbers of silent segments in their conversations,  suggesting that they might be switching back and forth  between driving and the conversation to ensure that the  driving task was managed. another potential effect is that  the action of conversing may subconsciously increase  drivers’ awareness of their driving performance. kubose [6]  showed that talking improves driving performance  compared to driving in silence, finding less variability in  maintenance of lane position across easy and difficult  driving. some of our results could be interpreted by taking  into account the automaticity of driving, where drivers are  able to drive safely without having to exert much attention.  in fact, experts can perform worse when they explicitly try  to focus on the components of their skills [3, 4].  in addition to pursuing measurable outcomes of the experi- mental conditions, we sought insights about the cognitive  mechanisms underlying the findings. we were particularly  interested in understanding how cognitive demands that  conversations place on drivers (e.g., tasks requiring spatial  resources versus requiring verbal resources) interacted with  the oft automatic, visual-spatial-motor task of driving. we  had hypothesized that the visual-spatial task of generating  directions would result in the largest degradation in per- formance during driving, but found retrieval tasks had a  more costly influence on driving performance. according to  the multiple resource theory (mrt), a largely verbal phone  conversation should not significantly interfere with a purely  visual-spatial driving task [7, 34, 36]. however, for real- world tasks, it is probably important to move beyond simple  notions of multiple resources and to consider the details of  problem solving associated with a superficially verbal  phone conversation. tasks may require multiple stages of  effort and draw upon a rich array of cognitive resources.   for example, there is evidence that complex cognitive in- vestments are made in preparation for retrieving informa- tion from memory [30]; such preparation may interfere with  other cognitive resources, and the concurrent execution of a  primary task such as driving.    beyond only considering contention for similar cognitive re- sources, studies of interference in dual-task settings might  also better leverage considerations of task decomposability  and the efficiency with which people can control the se- quencing of the chains of subtasks. prior studies have exam- ined chunking for dialing while driving, showing that drivers  interleave dialing subtasks with driving so as to maintain lane  keeping performance [10]. returning to the examples at  hand, it is possible that the directions-generating task, even  though drawing upon resources required by the visual-spatial  driving task, could be efficiently decomposed into smaller  subtasks that are sequenced under user control, enabling  drivers to modulate the interleaving of subtasks with the de- mands of driving. drivers may consciously choose to inter- leave driving with call subtasks depending on the combined  cognitive load and structural composition of the tasks. a re- trieval task may be less decomposable, thus providing drivers  with fewer opportunities to make tradeoffs in their focus of  attention per the real-time requirements of the driving task.  several prior studies have explored task decomposition and  opportunities for interleaving other tasks into the subtask  structure [2, 26].  overall, the findings from our study emphasize the need for  more research on mrt models of dual-task performance  for real-world tasks. the complexity of the results suggests  that caution must be used in applying mrt to complex,  real-world tasks. we also need to understand the decom- posability of common tasks into subtasks that may be inter- leaved with subtasks of another. better characterizations of  the constellation of resources required to execute common  tasks are needed. it will likely be useful to pursue models of  dual-task performance that jointly consider resource conten- tion, task decomposition and subtask sequencing.   our general findings about the influence of phone conversa- tions, resonate with the findings of prior studies, and high- light the potential value of designing in-vehicle systems that  prioritize driving safety while being sensitive about users’  communication needs [13, 14]. evidence on conversations  and driving complexity could be harnessed in automated  safety services that might be engaged when attentional defi- cits are noted.  such systems could shift into a mode of  providing aggressive warnings about road nuances and haz- ards, modulating their warnings based on real-time infer- ences about conditions that would likely surprise drivers  who are handicapped with divided attention.  systems could  also mediate incoming calls and calls in progress, passing  callers to voicemail and even gracefully disconnecting calls  in progress with an apology to callers.  intelligent systems  might even one day impose a maximal driving speed or in- crease a minimal allowed distance to the car in front of a  driver when an attention-soaking conversation is detected,  thus generating more time for drivers to respond to events.  conclusion and future work  we conducted a study to explore how different types of  phone conversations during driving result in performance  degradation of both driving and conversations. our findings  show that simple routes with few or no other cars and con- stant speeds are safest in terms of receiving and engaging  with phone calls. despite their engagement in phone con- versations, drivers appear to try to maintain safety in driv- ing. however, problems with driving may arise when cog- nitive resource demands exceed resource availability, such  as when drivers are engaged in conversations involving re- trieving information from memory while facing a complex  situation on the road. the findings underscore the complex- ity of interactions between different kinds of conversation- centric tasks and driving.  the results also raise questions,  highlighting the importance of pursuing a deeper under- standing of the nature of real-world tasks and their demands  on cognition in realistic dual-task settings.   acknowledgments  we thank ed cutrell for suggestions on the design of the  driving study, ivan tashev for his help with the driving si- mulator, and the participants in our study.  chi 2010: driving, interrupted april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1289


  references   1. alm, h. and l. nilsson. the effects of a mobile telephone task  on driver behavior in a car following situation. accident  analysis and prevention, 27 (5). 707-715.  2. bailey, b.p. and s.t. iqbal. understanding changes in mental  workload during execution of goal-directed tasks and its  application for interruption management. acm transactions  on computer human interaction (tochi), 14 (4). 1-28.  3. beilock, s.l. and t.h. carr. on the fragility of skilled  performance: what governs choking under pressure? journal  of experimental psychology: general, 130. 701-725.  4. beilock, s.l., t.h. carr, c. macmahon. and j.l. starkes.  when attention becomes counterproductive: divided versus  skill-focused attention in performance of sensorimotor skills  by novices and experts. journal of experimental psychology:  applied, 8. 6-16.  5. berthold, a. and a. jameson. interpreting symptoms of  cognitive load in speech input. in user modeling, (vienna,  1999), new york: springer wien new york.  6. bock, k., g.s. dell, s.m. garnsey, a.f. kramer, and t.t.  kubose. car talk, car listen. in antje meyer, l.w., andrea  krott ed. automaticityand control in language processing,  psychology press, 2006, 21-42.  7. briem, v. and l.r. hedman. behavioral effects of mobile  telephone use during simulated driving. ergonomics, 38. 2536- 2562.  8. brookhuis, k.a., g. de vries, and d. de waard. the effects  of mobile telephoning on driving performance. accident  analysis and prevention, 23 (309-316).  9. brown, i.d., a.h. tickner, and d.c.v. simmonds.  interference between concurrent tasks of driving and  telephoning. journal of applied psychology, 53 (5). 419-424.  10. brumby, d.p., d.d. salvucci, and a. howes. focus on  driving: how cognitive constraints shape the adaptation of  strategy while dialing while driving proceedings of the  sigchi confrence on human factors in computing systems,  acm press, boston, ma, 2009, 1629-1638.  11. brumby, d.p., d.d. salvucci, w. mankowski, and a. howes.  a cognitive constraint model of the effects of portable music- player use on driver performance proceedings of the human  factors and ergonomics society 51st annual meeting, hfes,  baltimore, md, 2007, 1531-1535.  12. fisk, a.d., p.l. ackerman, and w. schneider. automatic and  controlled processing theory and its applications to human  factors problems. in human factors psychology, north- holland publishing co., 1987, 159-197.  13. green, p.a. driver distraction, telematics design, and  workload managers: safety issues and solutions, university  of michigan transportation institute, 2004.  14. hoedemaeker, m. and m. neerincx (eds.). attuning in-car  user interfaces to the momentary cognitive load. springer- verlag, berlin, 2007.  15. hoffman, j.d. a dynamic field theory model of shared  visual attention while driving university of iowa, iowa city,  2008.  16. horrey, w.j. and c.d. wickens. examining the impact of cell  phone conversations on driving using meta-analytic  techniques. human factors, 48 (1). 196-205.  17. james, w. principles of psychology, new york, 1890.  18. klauer, s.g., t.a. dingus, v.l. neale, j.d. sudweeks, and  d.j. ramsey. the impact of driver inattention on near- crash/crash risk: an analysis using the 100-car naturalistic  driving study data, national highway traffic safety  administration, washington dc, 2006.  19. lee, j.d., b. caven, s. haake, and t. brown. speech-based  interaction with in-vehicle computers: the effect of speech- based e-mail on driver's attention to the roadway. human  factors, 43. 631-640.  20. lee, j.d., d.v. mcgehee, t.l. brown, and n.l. ryes.  collision warning timin, driver distraction, and driver response  to imminent rear-end collisions in a high-fidelity driving  simulator. human factors, 44. 314-334.  21. levy, j. and h. pashler. task prioritisation in multitasking  during driving: opportunity to abort a concurrent task does  not insulate braking responses from dual task slowing.  applied cognitive psychology, 22. 507-525.  22. logan, g.d. repetition priming and automaticity: common  underlying mechanisms? cognitive psychology, 22 (1). 1-35.  23. mcknight, a.j. and a.s. mcknight. the effect of cellular  phone use upon driver attention. accident analysis and  prevention, 25. 259-265.  24. navon, d. attention division or attention sharing? attention  and performance, 9.  25. navon, d. and d. gopher. on the economy of the human  processing system: a model of multiple capacity.  psychological review, 86. 254-255.  26. newtson, d. and g. engquist. the perceptual organization of  ongoing behavior. journal of experimental social  psychology, 12. 436-450.  27. norman, d.a. and d.g. bobrow. on data-limited and  resource-limited processes. cognitive psychology, 7 (44-64).  28. nunes, l.m. and recarte, m.a. cognitive demands of hands- free-phone conversation while driving. transportation  research part f, 5. 133-144.  29. redelmeier, d.a. and r.j. tibshirani. association between  cellular-telephone calls and motor vehicle collisions. new  england journal of medicine, 336 (7). 453-458.  30. ruppin, e. and y. yeshurun. recall and recognition in an  attractor neural network model of memory retrieval.  connection science, 3. 381-399.  31. salvucci, d.d. predicting the effects of in-car interface use on  driver performance: an integrated model approach.  international journal of human-computer studies, 55. 85- 107.  32. salvucci, d.d., d. markley, m. zuber, and d.p. brumby. ipod  distraction: effects of portable music-player use on driver  performance proceedings of the sigchi conference on  human factors in computing systems, acm, san jose,  california, usa, 2007.  33. schneider, w. and r.m. shiffrin. controlled and automatic  human information processing ii: perceptual learning,  automatic attending and a general theory. psychological  review, 84. 127-190.  34. strayer, d.l. and w.a. johnston. driven to distraction: dual- task studies of simulated driving and conversing on a cellular  phone. psychological science, 12. 462-466.  35. violanti, j.m. cellular phones and traffic accidents. public  health, 111 (6). 423-428.  36. wickens, c.d. multiple resources and performance  prediction. theoretical issues in ergonomic science, 3 (2).  159-177.  37. wickens, c.d. and j.g. hollands. engineering psychology  and human performance. prentice hall, upper saddle river,  nj, 1999.  38. wickens, c.d., d. sandry, and m. vidulich. compatibility and  resource competition between modalities of input, output and  central processing. human factors, 25. 227-248.    chi 2010: driving, interrupted april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1290
