

  student socialization in the age of facebook  louise barkhuus  university of california, san diego  9500 gilman drive, la jolla, ca 92093, usa  barkhuus@cs.ucsd.edu   juliana tashiro  university of california, san diego  9500 gilman drive, la jolla, ca 92093, usa  jtashiro@ucsd.edu    abstract  most research regarding online social networks such as  facebook, myspace, linked-in and friendster has looked  at these networks in terms of activity within the online  network, such as profile management and friending  behavior. in this paper we are instead focusing on offline  socializing structures around an online social network  (exemplified by facebook) and how this can facilitate in- person social life for students. because students lead  nomadic lives, they find facebook a particularly useful tool  for initiating and managing social gatherings, and as they  adopt mobile technologies that can access online social  networks, their ad-hoc social life is further enabled. we  conclude that online social networks are a powerful tool for  encouraging peripheral friendships, important in particular  to students. we emphasize that the use of online social  networks must be viewed from a perspective of use that  involves both mobile and stationary platforms and that it is  important to relate online and offline social practices.  author keywords  social networking, mobile applications, facebook,  ubiquitous computing.  acm classification keywords  h.4.1: information systems applications: groupware.  general terms  human factors   introduction  online social networks, particularly ones based on offline  contacts, have recently received tremendous attention, both  in the media and in research. services such as facebook,  linkedin and myspace have spread rapidly, motivating  researchers to explore these in terms of different issues.  where some have looked at self-presentation [14, 16],  others have looked at ‘friending’ and ‘grouping’ behavior  within these networks [29, 32]. so far, the predominant  focus has been on online activity, with a few exceptions,  such as the exploration of online and offline integration in  special interest network [37] and motivations for using  online social networks in a work setting [15]. in this paper  we focus exclusively on online social networks’ use for  offline face-to-face contacts. as a widespread social online  network, facebook is interesting to study because of its  demonstrated strength of combining offline community  with online community [25, 30]; its heavy use makes it  relevant for research into structures and social practices.  today about 89% of us college students are members; the  majority of students are active users of facebook [18] and  use it to maintain and build offline relationships [25, 30].  as a diverse user group, students possess a broad set of  features that make them relevant for studying use of online  social networks. they are unusually nomadic [3, 34]; they  have classes and other academic activities at a variety of  locations and at different times, often combined with  working off-campus [34]. at the same time their social  sphere is wide: they have multiple sets of friends and  acquaintances, as well as school-related contacts (teachers,  dorm managers etc.) with whom they have daily  interactions [34]. they are therefore an interesting group of  mobile workers to study in terms of how they integrate  online social media into everyday life. in this paper we  explore how university students integrate facebook into  their daily communication and social life.  in order to explore the offline behavior of students we build  on earlier work exploring students’ daily life and use of  new technologies [3]. by studying students’ use of  facebook as a communication tool, we aim to trace how  students now incorporate facebook into their array of  everyday activities. we also draw on a recent ethnography  of student life to illuminate the structures of mobile  technology use among students [34]. we present a  qualitative study of 18 college students, all users of  facebook. through interviews and a 24-hour diary we  gained insight into the mechanisms with which these  college students access social networks as well as how this  influences their social whereabouts and, in particular, how  they organized their offline life around and through  facebook. our results point to the obvious social benefits of  online social networks, but more specifically to the frequent  occurrence of serendipitous social meetings facilitated by  facebook. we describe in which ways students integrated  (particularly mobile) use of facebook into their lives and  how facebook was useful for maintenance of particular    permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  chi 2010, april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, georgia, usa.  copyright 2010 acm  978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00.  chi 2010: organizations and communities april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 133


    peripheral friendships. we talk about how the genre of  online social networks lends itself well to casual  socialization. finally, we point out that it is important to  view the use of online social networks together with other  means of communication, as part of an offline life where  face-to-face socialization occurs with the same people as  communicated with through online social networks. online  social networks should also not be viewed in isolation from  their diverse access technologies any longer; it is important  to consider their use in relation to the many possible means  of access.   previous research  related research to our study ranges from studies about  student life and students’ use of technology to studies of use  of online social networks.  student life  traditional studies of student life tend to focus on  academics [6] and student/faculty relationships [7].  additionally, discussions and predictions regarding the  effects of information technology on campus have mostly  related to learning and academia [1]. one recent study that  describes in depth the social structures of campus life from  a student point of view is rebekah nathan’s ‘my freshman  year’ [34]. the ethnography was conducted by a professor  who went ‘undercover’ as a freshman student at her own  four-year university and experienced a full first year of  university in 2002-2003. because this ethnography was  made before facebook came about, nathan used other  technical means to communicate with her peers and  classmates. one of her important findings is how students’  lives are controlled to a high degree by scheduling. nathan  points out that not only do students often work on- or off- campus (half of her sample works part time up to 25 hours  per week, corroborating national surveys), but they also  take part in many extracurricular activities, such as  professional clubs, athletics and special interest clubs (e.g.  religious or volunteer activities). their lives are therefore  highly scheduled and they only have limited power, apart  from initial scheduling of classes (each semester/quarter) to  determine activities on an everyday basis.  a second finding, which few previous studies on student  life have focused on, is that students also live very social  lives. although nathan was surprised to discover how little  students socialized with dorm-neighbors in the residence  halls, they did socialize within other settings, such as  special interest clubs, planned outings with previously  known fellow students (such as high school friends), and  ad-hoc socializing with new friends [34]. combined with a  very scheduled academic and work life, this meant that  students’ social lives were also fairly scheduled except for  occasional serendipitous and ad-hoc meetings. similar to  other research findings, students had regular social  gatherings (e.g. lunch, coffee between two classes) that  leant on their class and work schedule.  finally, students lead mobile lives, constantly moving from  one place to another (classrooms to labs to work), making  their lifestyle nomadic at best. in our previous work we  found that it is particularly their lack of base that  characterizes their behavior; where research addressing  mobile work often assumes that mobile workers have a  base, the experience of undergraduate students is radically  different. [3].   students’ technology use  even before online social networks were as widespread as  they are today, students considered email beneficial for  social relations in college life [5, 11, 26]. other studies  have showed that the internet also helps students maintain  close ties between family and friends, especially those too  far away to visit in person on a regular basis, through, for  example, instant messaging and chat programs [38, 20].  baym et al., for example, looked at social uses of the  internet among us university students, however since the  study predated facebook they found no social interactions  taking place through “newsgroups, muds, role playing  games or any other internet-enabled communication  formats” [5]. similarly, quan-haase studied canadian  student use of communication technologies, contrasting  between local and far-away relations [38]; both studies  found instant messaging a prominent environment for  interacting. these two studies are particular snapshots of  their time and location, both because they predate facebook  and because mobile phone providers’ idiosyncrasies slowed  down us adoption of mobile phone texting compared to  europe and asia. their conclusion that students prefer  interactive, synchronous forms of online communication is  thus hardly generalizable over time.  students have often been early adopters of technologies,  since they are young and in the process of becoming well  educated and since many universities were pioneers in the  use of computing, often opening up access to all students.  as mobile phones became cheaper, they suited the nomadic  structure of student life well and students adopted them  rapidly. one study from 2006 showed that 97% of a us  undergraduate student sample had mobile phones and used  them widely to obtain social support; however, they were  still more likely to seek face-to-face interaction with friends  than using communication technology [20]. in terms of  mobile technology use, it is noteworthy that despite the  widespread use of students for studies of everyday use of  technology (such as dey and guzman evaluation of  presence displays [12] and håkonson et al.’s evaluation of a  mobile music sharing technology [24]; see also [4] for a  discussion of overall use of students as test subjects),  almost all the focus in such studies has been on academics.  studies have looked at in-class technologies [2, 39] and  students use of electronic means for note-taking [40], but  their integration of these technologies into their personal  lives has yet to be addressed. an exception is active  campus, a system that supports location-aware applications  for students [22]; still, the main emphasis is on academic  chi 2010: organizations and communities april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 134


  life (finding professors, finding classrooms). finally, a few  studies have looked at students’ overall adoption of  technology and found a high level of ownership of mobile  devices and computing technology among both us students  and australian students  [10, 27]. we therefore aim to  address this gap in the literature by exploring student life in  a more holistic way.  online social networks  facebook was the first major online social network that was  based on face-to-face relationships and collecting people  who were part of an actual physical connection: the  university [9]. although social networks such as orkut and  friendster existed before, these merely depended on general  links between friends and were not concocted around a  socio-geographic network. even earlier, studies of social  networks were often rooted in the notion of people’s ability  to communicate over long distances, connecting people  with mutual interests regardless of physical location [42].  initial academic descriptions of internet communication  focused on creating online communities, particularly  understanding how strangers form personal relationships  online [35] and defining the advantages of being able to  collect and build friendships over distance through mutual  interests [13, 42]. before facebook, social network sites  tended to ignore location as a defining factor and focused  on business connections (e.g., linkedin) or specific topics  (e.g., support groups); exceptions were a few networks that  specifically targeted local connecting (e.g., neighborhoods  online [23]). facebook was therefore not only a new type of  online social network, it also targeted a group that had not  been targeted as a coherent entity before: students at a  particular university, without the oversight of university  officials.   use of facebook   ellison, lampe and steinfield have studied the use of  facebook amongst college students from several  perspectives and it is here we find two exceptions to the  paucity of studies of social life related to facebook. in their  2007 study they find that social capital and social  interaction was predicted by high self-esteem, satisfaction  with university life and facebook use; they suggest that  facebook may help individuals to maintain pre-existing  close relationships [18], which our study explores in further  depth. in their recent interactions article, they discuss how  online social networks can mobilize social action within  special interest groups and grassroots political activities  [19].  most previous research, however, has focused on studying  the characteristics of facebook use not in isolation from  social relations but in isolation from actual activities in  users’ lives. facebook has been viewed as supporting  online communication between real-life acquaintances and  friends, but real-life communication that has been affected  or negotiated by facebook has been relatively ignored.  despite this lack, research has acknowledged that online  social network activity is strongly connected with offline  experiences [9, 37]. furthermore, little, if any, research has  so far addressed how facebook is increasingly moving from  the desktops into the palms of their users. even lampe,  ellison and steinfield have yet to address the means with  which the students in their studies are accessing facebook.  as we have noted, students have different lives from  working adults; with socially complex nomadic lives and  with the increase in smart phones, their use of social  networking will likely be adjusted to mobile technologies.  in our study we pay special attention to the different means  students use to access facebook.  method  as our data we used interviews and short self-report diaries.  we interviewed our participants for half an hour to an hour  about their use of facebook during a normal day, asking  them to provide examples of how their social life was  influenced by their use of facebook. we also asked them to  fill in a questionnaire about their use of facebook over the  last 24 hours, asking particularly about social meetings and  social communication. using elements of grounded theory  [41], we analyzed the interviews in conjunction with the 24- hour diaries by categorizing the different social events  people described and comparing and contrasting their  mobile access of facebook. our categorization was based  on the data of this study but it was also held against data  from our previous study where we had uncovered  socialization amongst students [3]. the interviews and  surveys were conducted between march and june 2009, all  during term time to control for possible differences in  behavior over final exams and holiday.   participants  participants were found through snowball sampling where  one of the authors recruited students directly through  classmates and via flyers on campus. we included 18  participants, 13 female and five male participants. all were  students at our university, between 19 and 23 years old: one  freshman, four sophomores, five juniors, seven seniors and  one first year grad student. on average, the participants had  been active users of facebook for 2.9 years, mostly  corresponding to their start at university. being a public  university, students were not necessarily affluent, but many  still were able to acquire the latest technology in laptops  and mobile phones. the criterion for taking part was being  an active facebook user. we looked for an equal number of  users with facebook available on their phone or not.   students’ mobility and access to technology  16 of our participants had a laptop, and while all 18 had a  mobile phone, only eight had a mobile phone sufficiently  advanced to access web sites or applications from.  interestingly, the willingness to carry around a laptop on  campus differed between participants, and hence affected  their level of mobile access to facebook. in accordance  with our previous research [3] it was evident that students  are nomadic and having a heavy laptop (subjectively judged  chi 2010: organizations and communities april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 135


    by the individual) or lacking access to power during the day  affected their inclination to bring it with them on their daily  routine. facebook was therefore semi-mobile for many  students, with some students making intensive use of  laptops during their daily activities around campus and  between home and work. we therefore classified our  participants individually as mobile (m), semi-mobile (sm)  or non-mobile (nm) facebook users. the mobile users  were the eight participants who had mobile phones where  they could access facebook, all of whom used that method  on a daily basis. the semi-mobile users were the five who  tended to carry their laptop with them from place to place,  using it in class, at coffee shops and in libraries for  facebook access (and other web use)1. finally, the last five  participants were characterized as non-mobile, as they did  not carry their laptop with them (if they had one) and  primarily accessed facebook from their home, work and  occasionally from public pcs on campus, for example in  the library.  mobile phones  although it would seem as if financial constraints would  affect student acquisition and use of mobile phones, it was  surprisingly easy to find students with high-end phones  with internet browsers or third-party applications2. the  most common was the iphone (5), followed by the  blackberry (3). one participant, classified as semi-mobile,  had an ‘ancient’ phone with internet access, but reported  accessing facebook through it only on rare occasions.  iphone and blackberry users all accessed facebook via a  downloaded application or, in one case, through the mobile- tailored version of the web site (m.facebook.com). our  results are structured in relation to two main issues:  facebook as communication and facebook’s influence on  social gathering.   facebook as communication  general use of facebook  similar to students from other universities who reported  facebook to be part of their ‘everyday activity’ [31], most  of our participants were heavy facebook users. they  estimated that they accessed facebook between one and  twenty times a day, on average 5.3 times a day for all  participants. differing across their access possibilities, the  mobile users estimated that they accessed facebook on  average 6.9 separate occasions per day, the semi-mobile  users 4.7 times and the non-mobile 2.6 times. these  numbers should be viewed cautiously, since several of the  users of desktops and laptops would log in at the start of a                                                             1 note that the university has an open campus-wide wireless  network available to all students.  2 it should be noted that virtually all data subscriptions in  the us, where the study took place, are for unlimited  internet access at a fixed price, often around $20 for data  only.  day and then keep a browser window open all day, looking  for updates occasionally. this particularly happened on  days when they were less mobile, such as on working days.  however it is unsurprising that mobile users accessed it  ‘separately’ more times per day than semi-mobile and  stationary users, as they have facebook in the palm of their  hand throughout the day. overall, mobile and semi-mobile  users reported using facebook more than non-mobile users.  most of the participants reported using all the common  features such as the wall, messaging, status messaging and,  in around half of the cases, also the built-in instant  messaging. two participants reported not updating their  status more than a couple of times per week but the rest  reported updating their status at least once per day.   communication through facebook  corresponding well to previous research we found our  sample of students to have many social and academic  activities [34]. these events, such as parties, coffee dates,  professional club meetings etc. needed constant  coordination. students were also to a certain extent  dependent on each other regarding schoolwork, such as  obtaining notes and information when missing class.  communication (as with all other groups of people) was  therefore essential and our participants used all available  means, from email, course discussion forums and other  web services (e.g. wikis) to mobile phones, both voice and  text. participants had a tacit understanding of what means  of communication was appropriate for what message, an  aspect of communication media that media richness theory  scholars have also pointed out [17]. these established  practices showed themselves relevant to the participants’  use of facebook as well. facebook was in many ways seen  as ‘just another means of communication’. two of the  participants used the analogy of texting (on a mobile phone)  to describe facebook’s personal wall function. one of  them said: “i use [the wall] to get a quick response or to  tell my friend something like ‘call me when you read this’  […] it’s more like the type of things i might text to  somebody” [m, female, grad student]. previous research  also points out the nature of text messaging being a  communication means for ‘lighter’ relationships compared  to voice calls [33]. others had much lower expectations to  how often their friends checked their ‘wall’; one participant  explained that it was not optimal communication because it  was not ‘quick’ enough, reasoning that people do not check  their facebook page all the time [sm, female, senior].   mobile facebook  smart phones with usable web browsing are relatively new,  and although users have been able to access web content  via web-enabled phones for almost a decade, facebook  became more readily available with its platform-specific  applications for the iphone and blackberries. however,  none of our eight mobile participants had owned a web- enabled phone prior to their current phone, except for the  aforementioned participant with an ‘ancient’ web-enabled  chi 2010: organizations and communities april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 136


  phone. this corresponds well to a survey from 2005 where  only 1.3% of students owned smart phones [10]). instead,  all were fairly new to mobile access of facebook: one  participant reported having had access to facebook on her  mobile device for more than a year and three between six  months and a year ago. four had only had the mobile access  method available for about a month, corresponding to their  acquisition of iphones or blackberries. these new users  reflected on their habits and reported that they accessed  facebook much more now than before acquiring the mobile  device. one participant said she used facebook more since  she got her blackberry, but she also described that she used  it differently: “i use mostly just the wall… changing my  status and looking at new photo uploads when i am on my  blackberry […] maybe ‘cause when i am using my  [blackberry] i don’t have as much time so i’m just kind of  browsing or responding to a friend really quick” [m,  female, senior]. she also observed that her friends had  changed habits as they had acquired mobile devices and  were now faster in answering or responding to content on  their facebook pages.  with the facebook application available for the iphone and  blackberries it was very easy for participants to check  updates and most of the mobile participants expressed that  they would often just click on the application “to see if  anything interesting had happened.” on their laptop, on the  other hand, they would spend longer, browsing pictures and  taking quizzes, but would only do this once or twice a day.   both mobile and semi-mobile users expressed great  satisfaction in being able to access facebook while out  during the day. they reported accessing facebook with  whatever means was available. one participant said: “i’d  wake up… since i’d be in bed and not want to get out i  might access facebook on my blackberry… you know  cause it’s there next to my bed… and then later in the day  after getting ready for school i would access it on my laptop  like in class, or in between. sometimes while walking to  class i will access facebook on my blackberry. after class  i usually go to work, so i’ll access it there” [m, female,  senior]. considering under what circumstances participants  used the mobile device over a laptop or desktop, another  explained: “i just use whichever one is more convenient.  sometimes i’ll use my iphone if my laptop isn’t near, but if  i have to send out a message or upload pictures i have to  use my laptop” [m, female, junior].   the mobile technologies available to the students such as  laptops and mobile phones were well integrated into each  student’s lifestyle. and in contrast to our earlier studies,  where students reported laptops being too heavy [3], the last  few years have seen lighter laptops, including the small  ‘netbooks’, making it possible for more students to carry  these with ease. we found mobile and semi-mobile users  use facebook in shorter ‘bursts’ than when dependent on a  desktop, remaining constantly ‘in touch’ with a large set of  friends and acquaintances. facebook was very integrated  into students’ communication patterns; they used it for  maintaining their social life, scheduling meetings in  professional clubs or volunteer work or arranging study- related meetings or class-related information exchange.  they were very loyal to facebook; under probing, they all  insisted that it was necessary in order to keep in touch with  all their friend and acquaintances. one participant said: “it  helps me keep in touch with my friends, and if i didn’t have  [facebook], honestly i would feel out of the loop.”  social gathering and facebook  from our data, as well as that of previous studies [3, 34],  we identified four different types of social gatherings or  events that were useful for our further analysis of  facebook’s facilitation in students’ everyday life.  scheduled social gathering: these gatherings included  sorority meetings, volunteer events or other meet-ups that  were partly social but often had a practical purpose too (e.g.  planning other events). these were often recurring events.  they were frequently planned through facebooks ‘event’  function, where one participant would set up an event and  invite relevant members.  semi-scheduled social gathering: these types of  gatherings included regular lunch dates or ‘pick me up from  class’ socializing. most often these were highly structured  and regular; since students have the same classes for a  semester/quarter and know each others’ schedules, these  were mostly facilitated simply by regular scheduling or by  mobile phone, text messaging or voice.  ad-hoc social gathering: this included spur of the  moment meet-ups and short-time planned meet-ups.  students often bump into each other on campus or around  housing, leading to ad-hoc socializing, but also short-term  plans (such as planning to have lunch the next day) would  fall under this category. facebook status messages were  found to facilitate these types of meetings in particular.  special events: these events are bigger and rarer events  often based on actual invitations. they were birthday  parties, for example, or a barbecue that had been planned  for a while. these events were often facilitated by  facebook’s ‘events,’ but we also found them facilitated  well by facebook’s status messages, as will be elaborated  on further down.  facilitating peripheral friendship  facebook has been named as particularly valuable in  supporting users’ management of so-called ‘weak ties,’ [21]  social connections that are peripheral (friends of friends,  remote colleagues, past classmates) [16, 19]. we found  several examples of this type of ‘functional maintenance’ of  relationships with peripheral people in the participants’  lives. one participant, for example, found it particularly  appropriate as a communication mechanism when she was  involved in recruiting newcomers for her sorority. she  explained that she normally would not think of telephoning  many of the people on her facebook friend list, but felt fine  chi 2010: organizations and communities april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 137


    about communicating with them through facebook: “…we  arrange outings together on facebook, ’cause like you  know, we all just meet each other and personally i guess i  would feel weird calling them up. […] it helps me to […]  forge better bonds with people i just met… or barely see…”  [m, female, senior]. another participant used her peripheral  facebook friends when she needed notes for a class she had  missed: “there was a girl that i knew in the class i needed  notes for a lecture that i didn’t go… so i searched for her  [on facebook] and i sent her a message like ‘hey i need the  notes for class’ and like yeah… [i use facebook messages]  usually when i just need like notes” [sm, female, senior].  in our study we found that social gatherings were arranged  through a mixture of the communication means available;  facebook was yet another way of arranging get-togethers.  participants used the event functions, and were keen on  inviting friends more or less formally through facebook’s  other mechanisms (such as groups and wall postings) as  well. facebook particularly functioned as a ‘buffer’ for  arranging ad-hoc social meetings with people the students  were not that close to. one participant said for example:  “[t]here are some friends that i would message on  facebook to hang out, but would never call to ask them.  […] like, we aren’t super close so, like i might be like,  “hey do you want to chill later this week” and then if they  say yes then we might plan something. i just wouldn’t feel  comfortable calling them” [nm, male, senior]. for another  participant, facebook worked as a tool for communication  with people he did not necessarily want close relationships  with: “even if i don’t know the person that well, so i don’t  have their number, i might comment them something [on  their wall]” [m, female, graduate student].  facebook’s ‘event tool’ enables members to invite a  selected set of facebook friends and to specify the time and  date in order for invitees to receive reminders. interestingly,  the event tool was mainly used when participants were  planning and attending larger events such as birthday  parties (special events) or, for example, structured sorority  events (scheduled social gathering). however, the majority  of social gathering that occurred was, as other descriptions  of student life suggest, ad-hoc gathering or semi-scheduled  social gatherings.   so far our data support previous studies in regards to how  facebook is used to support offline ties and connections. in  addition, we found that facebook can be used to leverage  other means of communication when lightweight  interaction is preferred. similarly to the way in which text  messages were often used in cases where phone calls would  not necessarily have been placed before (‘grooming’) [33],  communication through facebook is often characterized by  being ‘extra’ communication. this does not mean that the  communication is insignificant; in fact, as nathan also  describes, peripheral friends are very important to students’  university experience [34]. before discussing social  gatherings in more detail, we will discuss the possible side  effect of the personalized, often location-defining status  message.  status messages and uninvited meetings  although the status message in facebook is free text, it is  common for online social network users to describe their  present activity, often implying location [36] (‘working out  at the gym’, ‘studying at the library’ etc). research also  reports that users occasionally, by accident, give out too  much information and experience unwanted approaches  [ibid]. rather than focusing on unwanted approaches, we  asked our participants if they ever interpreted a location- defining status as an invitation, and if they had ever used a  local friends’ status message to ‘stop by’ a place they  reported being at. interestingly, three participants reported  this as being “a bit creepy.” one participant said that “it  would be awkward to just show up” [nm, male, senior] and  another participant responded that “it seems too stalker-like  to just appear at the place where someone is because they  put their status there” [sm, female, sophomore]. so  although participants reported often stating directly or  indirectly their location in their status, we found evidence  of strong unwritten rules in terms of uninvited social  gatherings. instead, they would use the status message as a  catalyst for further communication by, for example, sending  a text message responding to the status, eventually leading  to an ad-hoc social gathering.  facilitating social gathering through status messages  we found that one of the non-mobile, two of the semi- mobile and three of the mobile participants had used  facebook to facilitate meeting up with people during the  last 24 hours before their interview. the interviews also  uncovered older incidents of such connections, and all in all  ten of the 18 participants could recall specific incidents of  using facebook status messages to facilitate a face-to-face  social gathering. while all of these were initiated by  somebody’s status message, they were also all facilitated by  other communication means such as text messages and  phone calls. all in all we had 15 specific examples of this  type of meet-up. we can separate the incidents of  coordinating behavior into three categories: ‘spur of the  moment meeting,’ ‘meeting reminders’ and ‘social  assistance.’   spur of the moment meetings  as described above, the status messages provided valuable  social information for participants particularly for ad-hoc  social gathering. sometimes they were direct invitations  resulting in spur of the moment meetings: “the other day  my friend put a post ‘wanna go out for taco tuesday? call  me!’ so i called my friend and we went that night together  (laughing) i guess that sounds weird like inviting myself  (laughing)” [m, female, senior]. instead of directly asking  specific individuals, this participant’s friend relied on her  local social network to respond. so although the participant  felt as she was inviting herself, her friend had already  provided an open invitation, making it easier for her to  chi 2010: organizations and communities april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 138


  respond. other status messages resulting in real-life  encounters were less direct in their invitation. one  participant’s friend simply stated ‘hungry,’ causing the  participant to reply with a text message. subsequently they  met up an hour later. similarly, a participant reported  seeing a friend’s status: “my friend and i were both  studying for midterms a few weeks ago, and then she put in  her status ‘need caffeine’, so i replied and said that we  should go get starbucks. so we went” [sm, female,  sophomore]. our favorite example was a participant who  was selling chocolates for charity. she entered in her status- message from her iphone that she was in the library on a  particular floor selling chocolates and encouraged people to  stop by. she reported that four people had stopped by to  buy chocolate during the hour and a half she had been there.   notably, the majority of these ‘spur of the moment  meetings’ were facilitated by mobile use of facebook, and  this connection was not found among non-mobile users.  one non-mobile user reported that he sometimes sent  friends messages on facebook to see if they wanted ‘to do  something,’ but that this would be for planning future  events, not something that same day [nm, male, senior].   meeting reminders  status messages also facilitated meetings by reminding  participants about previously arranged events such as  parties or meetings (special events). these were not  necessarily ‘events’ on facebook, but status messages  helped friends remember social gatherings. one participant  explained: “one of my frat brothers had put in his status  that he was at a barbeque at the beach […] if i did [sic] not  see my friend’s status i would have completely forgot about  his barbeque” [nm, male, freshman]. another participant  explained that she was promoting a club, and on nights  where the club had events, she made sure to mention this in  her status. in return, many of her facebook friends would  contact her and ask to be put on the guest list.  social assistance  we also found examples of facebook content prompting  social activities by people who claimed they would not  have attended otherwise, mostly special events. one  participant explained that she was hesitant to go to a party.  but when she saw a close friend’s status indicating she was  going, the participant called her up so they could go  together. she said she would feel awkward going and not  knowing anyone [m, female junior]. another participant  put it in more general terms: “if my friend put that she’s  going to an event that i wanted to check out as well […]  like the seminars or like lectures […] sometimes i want to  check them out … but i hate going to those kind of things  by myself” [nm, female, junior]. the casualness with  which students can decide on social activities based on their  friends’ indications made facebook a useful facilitator for  shy and less extroverted students. this relates well to the  findings of ellison et al. that emphasize how self-esteem  was facilitated by facebook interactivity [18].  table 1 shows an overview of the different types of  coordinating behavior that facebook was found to facilitate.  note that we did not find any specific examples of  facilitation of scheduled social gathering although it is  apparent that facebook could easily support this.     examples found  in study  likely to be supported  but no examples found  spur of the  moment  meetings  social ad-hoc  gathering    meeting  reminders  special events scheduled social  gathering  social  assistance  special events   table 1: the support facebook provided in relation to the  different types of social gathering   discussion  for most of our participants, facebook was well integrated  into their usual communication infrastructures including  mobile phone, email and im. it has become embedded into  the setting, and to many students almost ‘invisible’ —  participants sometimes struggled to specify exactly how  they communicated in particular situations. yet it facilitated  numerous instances and types of social activities,  particularly ad-hoc social gatherings and special events. in  our discussion we want to highlight three issues that are  important when considering facebook as a social  facilitation tool. first, we point out that to students ‘friends’  does not denote a fixed set of people but instead has a fluid  definition. next we highlight the importance of peripheral  social relationships. finally, we discuss why facebook is so  well tailored for use by students to organize their lives.  student’s notion of friendships  university students are at a stage in life where their social  life is pivotal to their quality of life. it is also a time where  friendships are made, maintained, broken and perhaps  revived. interestingly, from our data it was evident that  “friendship” was an oversimplified label for a more  complex and diverse set of relationships. students used  facebook to not only plan socialization with friends but  also to overcome their shyness over contacting peripheral  friends directly. as nathan also describes, students often  have a set of five or six close friends, but these friends also  had similar sets of close friends that did not necessarily  overlap, making friends of friends “acquaintances” or  peripheral [34]. as boyd have pointed out previously in  connection with other online social networks [8], friendship  is a flexible notion; peripheral friendships can grow into  closer friendships and facebook, in this sense, was a  practical facilitator for precisely this process. students were  more likely to request casual socialization, or even  broadcast ‘invitations’ to their entire network, through  facebook than by telephoning. it was also considered easier  chi 2010: organizations and communities april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 139


    for someone to respond to such an informal invitation.  although facebook does not distinguish between close and  peripheral friends3, it facilitates well the building and  management of all types of friends through the control that  each user has over their communication through facebook.  the plausible deniability that automatically comes with an  online social network (as with most asynchronous  communication) made it ideal for many levels of friendship.   we also found that in particular mobile and semi-mobile  access to facebook facilitated ad-hoc social gathering  owing to its constant availability in the nomadic students’  lives. students could keep up with opportunities as well as  if they were in front of a computer all day (which some also  were occasionally due to work). facebook was in many  ways used to ‘do’ friendship, maintain it and adjust it. this  brings us onto the importance of students’ light social  relationships.  the importance of peripheral social relationships  being young and in college is difficult; college students  have to negotiate both strict time constraints and a  multitude of social engagements. it is important to students  to be popular, and complicated to know how to fit in. for  this population facebook functions as a buffer for much  communication around social engagements. it is not just a  practical means of communication; it also makes social  gatherings undemanding, which is important in order to  keep some relationships light. where previously, college  students might have had specific spots on campus where  their ‘crowd’ would gather, it is now possible to casually  keep up these light social relationships with a more fluid  physical location (and students might still have places  where they gather). in our study we found facebook to be a  great tool for shy students or students who just simply did  not feel close enough to certain other people to telephone  them. these light relationships are essential for student life  in that they ‘make’ the community that nathan describes as  missing in the dorms. the community is not missing, as she  first believed; it was to be found places other than physical  areas. it was not the dormitory hallways that created  community but instead students’ peripheral acquaintances  that made up one’s community [34].  in order to understand student life it is therefore essential to  understand students’ social relations. by highlighting the  importance of peripheral social relations we hope to have  provided further insight into students’ motivations for using  facebook and its integration into their everyday life. finally  we discuss why facebook is so well integrated into student  life.                                                             3 facebook does in fact allow users to define group of  friends and enable limits on specified friends’ access to  personal data. however, this functionality does not relate to  actual communication through facebook.  interweaving facebook into everyday student life  facebook is probably, even more than other communication  means, the glue in many students’ life.  where previous  research has focused on facebook as a tool for specific  tasks such as ‘keeping up with friends’ or ‘searching for  new friends’, we have attempted to provide a more holistic  overview of how facebook influences and facilitates real- life behavior. it was clear that students were able to weave  facebook into their nomadic life, particularly if they had  mobile or semi-mobile access. in a sense facebook had  become an infrastructure for facilitating certain types of  social gatherings. still, since none of the socialization  (specifically described as well as generally described by our  participants) was facilitated solely via facebook, it did not  work as an independent communication infrastructure.  facebook was integrated thoroughly into student life  because of high technology adoption rate and of availability  (of computers, network etc.), but more importantly it was  integrated because (nomadic) student life lends itself to  non-orderly social behavior. students need reminders for  events, incentives for social gatherings (e.g. a close friend is  also going) and facilitators for ad-hoc meetings, particularly  very sporadic ones. despite being busy, they are also (and  want to be) highly social, and facebook helps them to  achieve that.   finally, location was key to facebook’s integration into  students’ life. ad-hoc socialization is highly dependent on  partners being located in the same area, which by nature  many students are, at least during term time. where  previous online social networks attempted to collect  members despite distance, facebook collects people  because of nearness and therefore results in members using  it for real-life social gatherings. location helps the  incorporation of facebook into student lives.  conclusion  in this paper we set out to take a closer look at facebook’s  integration into students’ social practices, particularly in  relation to different modes of access to facebook. it is  particularly meaningful for students to use facebook on the  go because of their already nomadic lifestyle. we found  that they use the advantages that mobile or semi-mobile  access provides, especially in relation to negotiating  relationships: peripheral relationships, closer friendships,  and school- or organization-related relationships (although  it should be noted that we did not find any evidence of  faculty/student communication through facebook).   an interesting finding was that, amongst our participants,  the facebook users who were also using mobile or semi- mobile devices were indeed using facebook more for  arranging particularly ad-hoc social gatherings. this likely  stems from the ready opportunities they have throughout  the day to stay updated while out being mobile. the non- mobile users used facebook for social facilitation for events  that were less spur-of-the-moment and more planned, such  as special events. this does not automatically imply that  chi 2010: organizations and communities april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 140


  mobile access leads to a richer social life; students who use  facebook more for social life facilitation could also be  more likely to acquire mobile or semi-mobile  communication technology. also it should be noted that  given our small sample, it is not possible to observe  statistically significant differences.  the finding that facebook was used to facilitate ad-hoc  social gathering shows how online social network  interaction ‘spill over’ into real life, not as an exception, as  described by wellman [42], but as a normal continuation of  communication through the online social network. it is an  attribute of offline-based online networks that people  communicate through multiple means and the online  network then becomes yet another means.  the strength of facebook, as demonstrated in our study,  was that its genre lent itself well to casual interaction  online, leading to casual interaction offline. the genre of  facebook is illustrated through for example its ‘wall’ and  the ability to ‘poke’ a friend, items that give users a sense  of informality and lightness. facebook practically  supported communication between those who were not  close, since it does not require the exchange of email  addresses or phone numbers. moreover, messages (as well  as wall posts and pokes etc.) sent through facebook can be  ignored in a way that a phone call cannot. facebook as a  genre also (by its very nature) engages notions of friendship  and conviviality, rather than, for example, the connections  between work and email or the intimacy of a text message.   finally, our findings point to the importance of considering  platform and access mechanism when researching online  social networks. even the difference in level of access  means that the experiences are quite distinct; the type of  access transforms a longer-lasting, thorough experience,  exploring pictures and other people’s details, to a  lightweight experience, a simple checking of status and  personal messages. it is therefore essential to examine  online social network use in relation to these new  technologies and from a more holistic viewpoint.   acknowledgments  we thank the participants for their time.   references  1. agre, p. infrastructure and institutional change in the  networked university. information, communication,  and society 3(4), 2000, 494-507.  2. anderson, r. anderson, r. simon, b., wolfman, s  vandegrift, t. and yasuhara, k. experiences with a  tablet pc based lecture presentation system in  computer science courses. in proceedings of sigcse  2004.  3. barkhuus, l. and dourish. p. everyday encounters with  context-aware computing in a campus environment.  in proceedings of ubicomp 2004, pages 232-249.  springer.  4. barkhuus, l. and rode, j. from mice to men: - 24 years  of evaluation in chi. alt.chi, 2007. available at:  http://www.itu.dk/people/barkhuus/barkhuus-altchi.pdf   5. baym, n. k., zhang, y. b. and lin, m. c. social  interactions across media: interpersonal  communication on the internet, telephone and face-to- face. new media society, 6 (2004), 299 - 318.  6. becker, h., geer, b. and hughes, e. making the grade:  the academic side of college life. wiley, new york,  us, 1968.  7. bess, j.l. integrating faculty and student life cycles.  review of educational research. 1973; 43: 377-403.  sage.  8. boyd, d.. 2006. “friends, friendsters, and myspace top  8: writing community into being on social network  sites.” first monday 11:12, december.  9. boyd, d and ellison, n. social network sites:  definition, history and scholarhsip. journal of  computer-mediated communication. 13 (1), pp. 210- 230. 2007, wiley.  10. caruso, j. b. & kvavik, r. (2005). ecar study of  students and information technology 2005:  convenience, connection, control, and learning.  educause.  11. cummings jn, butler b, kraut r. 2002. the quality of  online social relationships. communication of the acm  45(july): 103-8.  12. dey, a. k. and de guzman, e. 2006. from awareness to  connectedness: the design and deployment of presence  displays. in proceedings of chi '06. acm, new york,  ny, 899-908.  13. deyoung, b., harris, p. and larsen, l. virtual  communities and university outreach. journal of  extension. 33 (1), february 1995, available at:  http://www.joe.org/joe/1995february/a5.php  14. dimicco, j.m. and millen, d.r., identity management:  multiple presentations of self in facebook. in  conference on supporting group work, (sanibel island,  fl, 2007), acm press, 383-386.  15. dimicco, j., millen, d. r., geyer, w., dugan, c.,  brownholtz, b., and muller, m. 2008. motivations for  social networking at work. in proceedings of cscw '08.  acm, new york, ny, 711-720.  16. donath, j. and boyd, d. public displays of connection.  bt technology journal, 22 (4), october, 2004, 71-82.  17. el-shinnawy, m.,  markus, m. l. the poverty of media  richness theory: explaining people's choice of  electronic mail vs. voice mail. international journal of  human computer studies. 1997, 46 (4), 443-468.  18. ellison, n. b., steinfield, c., & lampe, c. (2007). the  benefits of facebook "friends:" social capital and  college students' use of online social network sites.  chi 2010: organizations and communities april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 141


    journal of computer-mediated communication, 12(4),  article 1.  19. ellison, n. b., lampe, c., and steinfield, c. 2009.  social network sites and society: current trends and  future possibilities. interactions 16, 1 (jan. 2009), 6-9.  acm press.  20. gemmil, e.  and peterson, m. technology use among  college students: implications for student affairs  professional. in naspa journal, 2006, 43(2).  21. granovetter, m. the strength of weak ties. american  journal of sociology. 78 (6), 1973, 1360-1380.  22. griswold, w. g., shanahan, p., brown, s. w., boyer,  r., ratto, m., shapiro, r. b. and truong, t. m.  activecampus: experiments in community-oriented  ubiquitous computing, computer, 37(10), 73-81, oct.  2004.  23. hampton, k. n. and wellman, b. (2002) the not so  global village of netville. in barry wellman and  caroline haythornthwaite (eds.) the internet and  everyday life. oxford, uk: blackwell.  24. håkansson, m., rost, m. and holmquist, l.e. gifts  from friends and strangers: a study of mobile music  sharing. in proceedings of ecscw 2007, springer,  311-330.  25. joinson, a. n. 2008. looking at, looking up or keeping  up with people?: motives and use of facebook. in  proceeding of chi '08. acm, new york, ny, 1027- 1036.  26. jones s. 2002. the internet goes to college.  washington, dc: pew internet/am. life proj.  http://www.pewinternet.org  27. kennedy, g.e., judd, t.s., churchward, a., gray, k.  and krause, k.l. first year students' experiences with  technology: are they really digital natives? australasian  journal of educational technology, 2008, 24(1), 108- 122.  28. kozma, r. b. technology and classroom practices: an  international study. in journal of research on  technology in education. vol. 36, 2003.  29. lampe, c., ellison, n. and steinfield, c., a face(book)  in the crowd: social searching vs. social browsing. in  proceedings of cscw 2006. acm, new york, ny,  167-170.  30. lampe, c. a., ellison, n., and steinfield, c. 2007. a  familiar face(book): profile elements as signals in an  online social network. in proceedings of chi '07. acm,  new york, ny, 435-444.  31. lampe, c., ellison, n. b., and steinfield, c. 2008.  changes in use and perception of facebook. in  proceedings of cscw '08. acm, new york, ny, 721- 730.  32. lampinen, a., tamminen, s., and oulasvirta, a. 2009.  all my people right here, right now: management of  group co-presence on a social networking site. in  proceedings of group '09. acm, new york, ny,  281-290.  33. ling, r. the mobile connections. morgan kaufman,  2004.  34. nathan, r. my freshman year. what a professor  learned by becoming a student. penguin books, 2005.  35. parks, m. r. and floyd, k. making friends in  cyberspace. in journal of computer-mediated  communication. 1 (4), march 1996. international  communication association.  36. patterson, d. j., baker, c., ding, x., kaufman, s. j.,  liu, k., and zaldivar, a. 2008. online everywhere:  evolving mobile instant messaging practices. in  proceedings of  ubicomp '08, vol. 344. acm, new  york, ny, 64-73.  37. ploderer, b., howard, s., and thomas, p. 2008. being  online, living offline: the influence of social ties over  the appropriation of social network sites. in proceedings  of cscw '08. acm, new york, ny, 333-342.  38. quan-haase, a. university students’ local and distant  social ties – using and integrating modes of  communication on campus. information,  communication & society, 10 (5), 2007, 671-693.   39. ratto, m., shapiro, r.b., truong, t.m. and griswold,  w.g. the activeclass project: experiments in  encouraging classroom participation. in proceedings of  cscl 2003.  40. simon, b., davis, k., griswold, w. g., kelly, m., and  malani, r. 2008. noteblogging: taking note taking  public. in proceedings of sigcse '08. acm, new  york, ny, 417-421.  41. strauss, a. and corbin, j. basics of qualitative  research. sage, 1998.   42. wellman, b., quan-haase, a. boase, j., chen, w.,  hampton k., de diaz, i.i. and miyata, k. the social  affordances of the internet for networked  individualism. in journal of computer-mediated  communication. 8 (3). april 2003.       chi 2010: organizations and communities april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 142
