

  i don’t mind being logged, but want to remain in control:  a field study of mobile activity and context logging  tuula kärkkäinen1, tuomas vaittinen2, kaisa väänänen-vainio-mattila1,2   1tampere university of technology,  unit of human-centered technology  p.o. box 589, fin-33101 tampere, finland  {firstname.surname}@tut.fi  2nokia research center  p.o. box 407, 00045 nokia group, finland  {firstname.surname}@nokia.com    abstract  people have a natural tendency to capture and share their  experiences via stories, photos and other mementos. as  users are increasingly carrying the enabling devices with  them, capturing life events is becoming more spontaneous.  the automatic and persistent collecting of information  about one’s life and behavior is called lifelogging.  lifelogging relieves the user from manually capturing  events but also poses many challenges from the user’s  perspective. we conducted a field study to explore the user  experience of mobile phone activity and context logging, a  technically feasible form of lifelogging. our results indicate  that users quickly stop to pay attention to the logging, but  they want to be in control of logging the most private  information. although logging personal content, such as  text messages, is experienced as a possible privacy threat,  browsing the content and getting insight to the revealed life  patterns was considered interesting and fun.  author keywords  lifelogging, mobile phone activity, context, user  experience, field study  acm classification keywords  h4.m. information systems applications: miscellaneous.   general terms  human factors    introduction   people have a natural tendency to capture and share their  experiences via different life mementos. as users are  increasingly carrying the enabling devices with them,  capturing life events is becoming more and more  spontaneous. still, many precious moments pass without  people obtaining any mementos. lifelogging, i.e.,  automatic and continuous recording of information of one’s  life events, would relieve the users from manually capturing  important events.  the ultimate vision of lifelogging can be defined as “a form  of pervasive computing, consisting of a unified digital  record of the totality of an individual's experiences,  captured multimodally through digital sensors and stored  permanently as a personal multimedia archive” [6]. a  lifelog may contain (1) information about the person’s  activities such as when and where the activity took place,  and (2) the content of what was done, and said, etc. [6].  a mobile phone contains information about its owner’s  social connections in the form of contacts as well as phone  calls and message logs. global positioning system (gps)  functionality enables the device to determine the location of  the user and bluetooth (bt) scanning allows the phone to  detect other nearby devices and people. in addition, the  camera enables users to capture memories visually  whenever they want to. the use of these mobile phone  features is now making lifelogging feasible. however, as  lifelogging is based on rapidly developing technologies and  inherently touches people’s everyday lives, development  may face many challenges from the perspective of user  experience (ux). ux consists of the pragmatic and hedonic  aspects of use [11], and thus is dependent on both  functional and emotionally meaningful features of the  system.   this paper focuses on the ux of mobile phone activity and  context logging. we conducted a field study with 13  participants who used such a logging system. we studied  how the awareness of logging affects users’ behavior, their  sense of privacy and the extent they need to be able to  control the logging to feel comfortable with it. furthermore,  we studied what information people find interesting and  valuable as well as what information is considered too  sensitive to be logged and what information is considered  useless. finally, we wanted to explore the purposes that  users have for logging information and what their needs are  related to sharing their logs with others.  background and related work   a short history of lifelogging  the idea of lifelogging dates back to the 1940’s when  vannevar bush suggested a private file and library system  called “memex” for storing all of an individual’s books,        permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  chi 2010, april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, georgia, usa.  copyright 2010 acm  978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00.    chi 2010: privacy awareness and attitudes april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 163


  records, and communications, which could be consulted  with speed and flexibility [2]. since then, many lifelogging  experiments have been based on the idea of recording all  the things one experiences in life in visual or audible form,  for example, on video using a head-mounted camera for  recording and broadcasting the user’s life [4,13]. in these  experiments, the researchers have recorded their own life  and introspectively analyzed the experience.  other “memex”-like approaches have also been presented.  mylifebits by microsoft is a research system storing all  personal information found on a pc. its goal is to store  everything that can be captured, including web pages,  phone calls, meetings, room conversations and mouse  clicks for every active screen or document, as well as all the  1000-2000 photos that sensecam captures every day [8].  in the 1990’s, donald norman [15] speculated about a  small and portable personal life recorder device named  “teddy” that would be given to children in the early  childhood. the device would record all of its owner’s life  moments, and the collected data would be transferred to  devices matching the owner’s maturity level.   modern mobile phones contain various personal life  activity logs and are increasingly starting to resemble the  idea of “teddy”. based on that idea, researchers at  samsung electronics software laboratory have developed  a mobile life diary that records all of the mobile phone’s  activities [19]. the life diary ecosystem also has a larger  infrastructure including the pc and the internet to enable  keeping track of personal music, photo, video and file  collections. a similar commercial system, nokia lifeblog,  implements the collection of content recorded with a mobile  phone as well as software for browsing the content with a  phone and a pc [14]. it supports storing photos, videos, text  messages (sms), multimedia messages, notes and blog  entries.   although many different lifelogging implementations have  been introduced during the last decades, very few ux  studies have been conducted. this is largely due to the  controversial ethical and legal issues related to lifelogging.  speculations and predictions made on the implications of  lifelogging are described in the next section.   benefits and risks of lifelogging  lifelogging enables the capturing of precious moments in a  person’s life, allowing that person to focus on experiencing  the moment with little or no interaction with the capturing  device. however, further benefits have been predicted: a  lifelog would work as a memory aid, it could be used in  sharing personal experiences with others, and it would  foster personal reflection and analysis [1,5]. additionally, it  could help in time management through the coordination  among family, friends, and co-workers, and increase  security as the logged information could be used for legal  purposes, e.g., as an evidence [5]. thus, it is easy to see  why the automatic and continuous capturing of one’s life  appeals to people [9].   there are, however, many controversial legal and ethical  issues related to lifelogging, no matter how well the  recorded memories are secured, the external records are still  easier to access by third parties than human memory and  thus pose a data security threat. the opinions of people  differ when it comes to losing privacy and control over  what is recorded. most people are not willing to relinquish  this control [17].   cheng et al. [3] predicts that systems that record an  individual’s perspective of the world, using personal  sensors such as a microphone and a camera, will emerge  and they will radically change our notions of privacy. like  we expect almost everyone to have a mobile phone today,  in the future we might expect everyone to record their  lifelogs and hence be able to recall things that most people  would have normally forgotten.   access to extensive records of one’s life has its downsides.  complete and objective memories of past, traumatic events  that one would normally forget over time may have a very  negative effect on mental well-being. moreover, the  availability of an extensive lifelog might lead to  pathological rumination of one’s past and over-valuing the  otherwise transient details of one’s life [1]. these issues  pose a great challenge for lifelogging system design.  furthermore, recording one’s life is restricted not only by  an individual’s privacy concerns and the community norms,  but also by legislation. when recording one person’s life,  many aspects of the lives of people around him or her are  also recorded, and the statutory consent requirements pose  great challenges for lifelogging [3]. olsson et al. [17]  suggests that one solution to recording data continuously,  but yet more ethically, is to record mere context data  excluding audio and visual media.  allen [1] lists the following ethical limitations for  lifelogging: 1) no one should be required to keep a lifelog  and no one should be suspected for not keeping one. 2)  personal lifelogs should be deemed the property of the  creator and no one should record the activities of others for  a lifelog without their consent. 3) the owner/subject should  be able to delete and add content at will.  lifelogging and sharing   the need to save memories is often interconnected with the  idea of also sharing them with others [17]. a lifelog  consists of a much wider range of personal media content  and other recorded information than just photos. however,  as the personal photos represent mementos of past events,  the motivations and patterns related to photo sharing may  well apply to the sharing of lifelogs.  van house et al. [21] divide the motivations for sharing  camera phone photos into five categories: creating and  maintaining social relationships, constructing personal and  group memories, self-expression, self-presentation, and  chi 2010: privacy awareness and attitudes april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 164


  functional purposes. furthermore, camera phone photos  seem to be shared with people who pose in the pictures or  those who should have been there [17,21]. olsson et al. [18]  argue that the recipients of this kind of personal content  usually do not vary much for an individual user.    user experience of lifelogging  hassenzahl and tractinsky [12] define user experience as  “a consequence of a user’s internal state, the characteristics  of the designed system and the context within which the  interaction occurs.” according to hassenzahl [10,11],  people perceive interactive products along two different  dimensions: pragmatics and hedonics. pragmatics refers to  the product’s perceived ability to support the achievement  of “do-goals”, and hedonics refers to the product’s  perceived ability to support the achievement of “be-goals”.  assessing pragmatics calls for a focus on the product – its  utility and usability in relation to potential tasks. assessing  hedonics calls for a focus on the user himself, i.e., the  question of why does someone own and use a particular  product, and what are the emotional responses that the users  have by using the product.  the user experience regarding lifelogging is not only about  the logging of life data itself. in addition to recording, the  total experience of lifelogging includes the interaction with  the recorded material afterwards or simultaneously with  recording. therefore, important issues affecting the  lifelogging ux include the experience of controlling the  logging, including what is logged and when, as well as any  interaction with the logs by browsing, editing, or sharing  the logged information with others.   previous studies have been mostly speculative predictions  about the issues that will emerge from lifelogging  [1,3,6,16], and only a few studies on real user experience  have been reported [4]. the present study’s goal is to  conduct a field study of 13 participants in order to gain a  more thorough understanding of ux issues related to  lifelogging. because such extensive logging has many legal  and ethical issues as well as privacy implications yet to be  solved, we used a limited set of logged information and let  the user have more control of the logged content than in the  prevalent scenarios of lifelogging. furthermore, we aimed  at gaining an in-depth understanding of the logging ux by  analyzing how the pragmatic and hedonic aspects are  emphasized.    field study   there have been lifelogging studies focusing on the  continuous recording with wearable cameras and media  content indexing on the personal computer [4,8,13]. our  focus was on the material recordable with a mobile phone, a  personal device that people frequently carry with them. the  phone logged the content available on the phone, the  interaction the user has with the phone and the context data  recorded from the environment.  study setup  the field trial with three participant groups of a total of 13  users was conducted in finland. the study lasted from eight  to eleven weeks depending on the participant group. the  study started with a six to nine week long logging periods  (varying between the user groups because of the  recruitment practicalities), and then proceeded to the phase  where the users could use a web application to browse and  share their logged data. the logging period was  intentionally longer than the browsing period so that the  users could gain a long-term perspective of their logs.  users had phones running a logging client application and  flickr (www.flickr.com) accounts for storing and viewing  the photos and videos they captured during the trial. in  addition, they had approximately 10 days to use the web  application for viewing their own and their friends’ shared  logging information, including the photos stored on flickr.  during this time, users still employed their phones to log  their mobile phone activity.  logging setup  as the recorded information extended to personal data, we  met the potential participants face-to-face before the trial to  introduce them to the objectives and details of the trial.  users also created accounts for the services used in the trial:  flickr, and shozu (www.shozu.com). shozu was used for  getting gps coordinates to the photos and videos and for  uploading them to flickr.  in the following meeting, the users were lent nokia n95  8gb camera phones. the phones contained the shozu  application for uploading photos and videos, and the nokia  simple context collector for performing the rest of the  logging. the following three types of context information  were recorded and periodically uploaded to a server:   • location: the gps coordinates and gsm cell ids   • bt devices: for example, the bt names and the media  access control (mac) addresses of the nearby bt  devices  • wireless local area networks (wlan): for example,  the access point names and mac addresses of the nearby  wlan devices  in addition, the following actions were logged and  uploaded:   • made and received phone calls: for example the  timestamp, direction, duration, as well as the phone  number and name of the other party.  • the text messages that were sent and received, e.g., the  timestamp, direction and contents, as well as the phone  number and name of the other party.  • the music tracks to which the participants listened, e.g.,  the timestamp, title, artist, album and duration.  a written contract between the test users and researchers  was made about the extent of logging and the principles of  chi 2010: privacy awareness and attitudes april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 165


  using and storing the data. this way the data collection was  in full accordance with the laws of finland regarding data  security of electronic communication. the information that  was logged was stored for the users’ own use and viewed  strictly by the users themselves. only the amount of  uploaded data was monitored by the researchers to ensure  that the logging clients were working correctly.   users had an option to stop participating in the trial at any  time. furthermore, the logged information from all users  was removed immediately after the end of the trial, and  only the quantitative information about uploaded data  amounts was stored until the end of the next calendar year.   during the study, users were asked to use the mobile  phones as they would normally do. users had their own  subscriber connections in use during the trial, but they were  compensated for all the data traffic expenses caused by the  trial. after six to nine weeks of logging, the web application  for browsing the logged information was introduced to  them. next, users had about ten days to use the application,  while still having the phones logging their life information.   in this paper, we discuss the ux of the mobile activity and  context logging, including the interaction with the logged  data using the web application. because the ui design of  the application plays an essential role in the experience of  interacting with the log, we shortly describe the ui as well.  web application for browsing the logged information  during the last ten days of the trial, users were able to  browse their own logged information with an adobe flash-  based web application used via web browser. with this  application, they were also able to share information with  others and view the shared information of other users. users  had to authenticate themselves to the system by entering a  user name and password.   the ui of the application has two main views for browsing  the logged information: the timeline and the map.  both of  the views present the stored information as content items  represented by icons or thumbnails, depending on the media  type. the supported media types are photos, videos,  listened-to music tracks, text messages, phone calls and  location (gps) tracks, i.e., paths created from the sequences  of locations. metadata about an item will be presented in a  tooltip when the user holds the cursor over an item.  in the timeline view, the user and his or her friends each  have their own timeline. on these timelines, the user’s own  items as well as the items shared by their friends are shown  in chronological order. in the map view, items are overlaid  on top of a map at the position in which they were created  (see figure 1).  in either of the views, timeline or map, the user can open  the items in a separate view where the item is presented  alongside some information derived from the stored data,  like friends who were present at the time of the creation of  the logged event.    figure 1. map view of the web application with a tooltip of a  music track activated.  the items the user shares with friends in flickr are  automatically shared with the same people in our system.  users can also share photos, videos, location tracks and  titles of listened-to music tracks item by item with our web  application.  users can select the individual users with whom the items  are shared and the extent of the shared metadata. for  photos, videos and music, users can decide if the location of  the item is shared. for photos, videos and location tracks,  the user can also decide whether the title and the description  of the item are shared. as text messages and phone calls are  considered to be owned by both participants, both  participants would need to agree to share these items. the  required functionality would be rather complex so, in order  to protect the other party’s privacy at this stage, the sharing  of text messages and phone call information was disabled.  participants  three groups of friends were recruited to participate in the  trial: two groups of five members and one group of three  members. thus, in total, we had 13 participants (11 males  and two females). all the participants were from 19 to 32  years old. ten of the users were students, and their  educational background ranged from attending vocational  schools to attending universities. two participants were  working; one was a factory worker and the other person  was an it consultant.   all the participants were daily users of mobile phones.  they were also active media consumers, and most of them  were familiar with social media web sites, such as  facebook (www.facebook.com), flickr and last.fm  (www.last.fm). in addition, 10 participants were listening to  music daily, and 12 were taking photos at least monthly.  the participants in group 1 were actively meeting friends (4  males, 1 female), who were living in the same city and  sharing common interests. the second group consisted of  two brothers who were sharing an apartment and their male  friend who lived 200 km away. group 3 consisted of a  chi 2010: privacy awareness and attitudes april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 166


  group of acquaintances who were living in the same city (4  males, 1 female), formed around one person who knew the  others.  methodology  our main goal in the study was to gain insight into the  subjective experiences of users’ mobile phone activity and  context logging. to achieve these goals, users were  interviewed individually twice during the trial: after six to  nine weeks of logging, but before using the web application  and at the end of the trial. both semi-structured interviews  consisted of two parts: the first part was about logging and  privacy-related issues and the second part was about the use  of the web application.  the interviews were recorded and transcribed, and the  collected data was compiled into tables categorized by the  interview questions. next, the comments were organized by  the following repeatedly appearing themes: general  experiences on logging, experiences on logged content  types, privacy, experiences of logging text messages,  sharing of logs, and behavior changes during the trial.  the logging experience was also measured with a  quantitative survey at the end of the trial. the questionnaire  was created on the basis of two existing ux question sets:  the attracdiff 2 questionnaire by hassenzahl [10] and the  ux elements defined by roto and rautava [20]. the  attracdiff 2 questionnaire measures perceived pragmatic  quality, hedonic quality–stimulation and hedonic quality- identification. the ux elements that roto and rautava  have identified are utility, usability, social value and  enjoyment [20]. furthermore, the questionnaire was created  to focus especially on the aspects relevant to the ux of  mobile activity and context logging. the scale was 1-7 (1 =  completely disagree and 7 = completely agree).  results  we present the results of our study by the main themes that  arose from analyzing the interview data, backed up by the  log data and the ux questionnaire results.  during the trial, on average, 6.5 calls, 4.7 text messages  (smss), 1.0 photos, 15.7 music tracks, 1.3 location (gps)  tracks and 0.02 videos were logged each day for each  participant. as can be seen from the table 1, differences  among the participants were large. for example, the  average number of logged text messages per day varied  from 0.3 to 9.9. this reflects the broad range of phone  usage habits of the participants.  the average number of videos per day was very small. the  only exception was one user from group 1 who uploaded 13  videos during the study. for automatically logged content,  like text messages, the number of logged items remained  quite stable over the course of the study (see figure 2). in  contrast, the number of photos that were uploaded manually  decreased somewhat towards the end of the study. the peak    user calls smss photos music gps tracks m, 32 3.6 3.5 2.0 2.8 1.2  m, 21 3.2 5.8 3.3 72.1 1.0  m, 22 4.3 8.2 1.2 33.5 1.5  f, 21 5.6 7.1 1.1 6.2 1.4 g ro up  1   m, 24 8.7 1.8 0.5 8.9 1.8  m, 19 1.0 1.1 0.5 1.8 0.5  m, 19 1.3 1.4 0.9 10.5 1.0  g ro up  2   m, 19 2.1 0.3 1.1 4.6 1.8  m, 25 9.0 3.8 0.1 11.2 1.9  f, 22 11.8 8.4 0.2 14.8 1.5  m, 25 9.1 0.7 1.7 33.1 1.6  m, 25 16.1 9.9 0.4 4.7 0.7 g ro up  3   m, 21 8.4 9.6 0.1 0.2 1.3  table 1. the average number of items created in a day per  participant.       figure 2. the weekly average numbers (over participants) of  photos and text messages logged during the study.  at week 6 was due to one user who uploaded 69 photos in  one day. otherwise, the decline in numbers of uploaded  photos was quite steady.  general experiences on mobile phone activity logging  users were only a little disturbed by the logging. after the  logging client had been running on the users’ phones for a  few days, users stopped paying attention to the logging. none  of the users experienced the logging as a negative experience  in the first interview.   ”i’m really against supervisory society, so this has  been very interesting. what if your every step is  recorded? but i haven’t noticed anything, i’ve  forgotten [the logging] completely.” (male, 22)   in the beginning of the study, the participants’ predictions  about the benefits of lifelogging included the logged  information working as a memory backup and helping in  getting a picture of one’s life and behavior, as also  predicted in the literature [1,5] and shown later in our study.  before being allowed to browse the logs, users were  chi 2010: privacy awareness and attitudes april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 167


  thinking mainly of the personal benefits of lifelogging such  as observing where they have been and how they have used  their phones, but no social benefits were expected.  browsing the logs changed the situation so that getting  information about one’s friends was emphasized. users  were especially interested in whether their friends did  something that was out of their normal, daily routines, for  example traveling outside their home town or, finding out  something that was previously unknown but that was held  in common among friends. these created positive  experiences for users.  ”it’s the thing that you can see what you’ve been  up to and how you’ve been using the phone. in a  way you can analyze your lifestyle more. and  similarly what your friends are doing, you can find  common interests that you might not have realized  before.” (male, 21)  the perceived downside of logging included rapid battery  consumption and the threat that logging poses to privacy.  the latter is discussed in more detail in the following  sections. as the literature predicted [1], one of the users  was worried that logging might start to control one’s life:  ”it might also be somehow addictive, if the  possibility to collect some statistics turns one’s life  to just collecting the statistics.” (male, 21)  all in all, users considered the experience to be positive.  this can also be seen from the questionnaire results as the  median of the answers to the statement i definitely want to  continue data logging was 5.5 (between slightly agree and  mostly agree).   experiences on the logged content types and actions  the continuous activity and context logging will quickly  result in the collection of huge amounts of information. to  avoid overwhelming the user, it is important to identify the  content and information that is of real value to the user.  we inquired of the participants how interesting they  considered the logged information to be. before seeing their  data, users were thinking of the individual data items, not  what the logged information could reveal about their lives  when the pieces of information have been aggregated. still,  many users considered the location information interesting,  both as pure location tracks and related to photos. despite  having little practical use or emotional value to the users,  the nearby bt devices and wlan access points, otherwise  invisible to the human eye, were also considered  interesting. after having browsed the logs, the most  interesting content types included photos, listened-to music,  text messages, and location tracks. the photos were clearly  the most interesting content in the web application.   this reflected also on their browsing habits. when asked  what participants checked first when logging into the  system, they said that they checked their own activity,  especially music listening from the last few days, and then  they checked the activities of their friends, and whether   % of  data  (d)  % of  clicks  (c)  % of  tooltips  (t)  ratio of   c to d  ratio of  t to d  calls 21.4 26.6 21.2 1.2 1.0  smss 16.0 15.3 14.6 1.0 0.9  photos 3.5 27.6 24.6 7.8 7.0  videos 0.1 0.3 0.3 5.3 5.2  music 54.4 21.0 30.5 0.4 0.6  gps  tracks 4.6 9.1 8.8 2.0 1.9  table 2. percentages of logged and browsed content types (by  selecting an item by clicking it or by opening an item tooltip).  their friends had been nearby or whether they had shared  any photos. furthermore, when compared to the amount of  each media type in the system, photos were browsed the  most (see table 2). activity logs of the web application  show that 27.6 % of the times an item was selected by  clicking it, the item was an image, although only 3.5% of  the items in the system were images (almost 8:1 ratio). a  similar 7:1 ratio for images can be seen when analyzing the  distribution of opened tooltips. the relative numbers of the  browsing actions directed to the other content types were  much closer to the relative amounts of those content type  items, ratio varying from 0.4 to 2. (there were too few  videos uploaded to make conclusions about them.)  users found the logged information interesting according to  the questionnaire as well. the median of the answers to the  statement the logged data makes me curious was 6 (mostly  agree).  we also wanted to know how satisfied users were with the  current variety of logged information and what other  information they desired to be logged. according to the  questionnaire results, users desired more information to be  logged. participants only slightly agreed with the statement  the system logs all the data i want with a median of 4.5.  before browsing the logs, participants’ suggestions, on  what should be logged in addition, included status  messages, video calls, calendar events, data traffic statistics  and statistics of captured photos. after browsing the logs,  the list grew with multimedia messages, statistics about the  detected bluetooth devices and listened-to radio stations.  however, there was also hesitation regarding whether all  the logged information should be retained. the statement  the system logs data that i don’t want in the questionnaire  got a median of 4 (neither agree nor disagree).  the content type that the users hesitated to log the most was  clearly the text messages, which was mentioned by six  participants. logging the names of the callers or the call  recipients, as well as the locations, worried only individual  users. in general, users seemed to be more careful with the  information about others than about themselves.  chi 2010: privacy awareness and attitudes april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 168


  the least interesting content type in the web application  was the phone call. the limited information logged and  displayed in the application about the phone calls were not  enough to help users remember the content of the call or the  situation. thus, the individual items logged did not provide  users any real value. however, when viewing the items in  larger clusters, they became more meaningful because this  information began to reveal patterns. one user brought up  the issue that the logs may encourage users to analyze their  own behavior. recognizing a habit of making phone calls  whenever waiting for a bus, created a stimulating and  positive experience for the user.   ”you’ve noticed for example a place, where you  have to stand still a lot, you can see loads of phone  calls there, like a bus stop, where you’ve changed  busses. these are interesting discoveries.”  (female, 22)  in total, there was no clear division that separated  interesting and uninteresting content types in the web  application, but the valuation of content types varied from  user to user. some users found it difficult to distinguish  among the most interesting content, since all of the content  was somewhat interesting.  ”[the most interesting content types are] photos  and the locations, and i have to say that the  messages and phone calls as well. you get to know  where you’ve called and to whom and those old  messages. it’s exciting to see where you have sent  them and when.” (female, 22)  in summary, the limited version of lifelogging we have  implemented provided value for the users, but participants  wanted the addition of more content types.  sense of privacy  continuous and extensive logging and storing of  information on one’s life obviously gives rise to concerns  over whether one can trust that the information remains safe  and private.  a related issue is the amount of control  required to make the users willing to use the logging. we  questioned our participants about possible privacy concerns  and how they felt about the control options.   most of the users felt that their privacy was not threatened,  despite using the logging system. there were, however,  concerns about the technology failing in general, about  passwords getting into the wrong hands and issues related  to the logging of text messages.  ”so much data is transferred from the phone, and  it’s easy to intercept.” (male, 25)  one user was worried because his messages were stored in  two places, and protecting his privacy was no longer just a  matter of holding onto his phone. the password protection  and data encryption features on the server were not enough  to make him feel that the information is secure.    all in all, the interviews revealed that the concerns users  had were not as severe that they would have prevented the  users from logging and using the system. this is also  supported by the previously stated median of 5.5 (between  slightly and mostly agree) of the statement i definitely want  to continue data logging.  however, it must be taken into  account that the issues that had helped users feel that their  privacy was secured had more to do with the trial  arrangements than the features of the system. it was  naturally easier for the users to trust the system due to  meeting the researchers face-to-face than if they had started  using it on their own.   users had a need to control what was logged and when,  especially in relation to text messages and phone calls. in  the trial, users were in total control of what events to  capture with photos or videos, as well as which photos and  videos to keep and which to upload to the system’s server.  this setup was considered good by the users. only three of  the users would have liked automatic upload if battery  consumption would have allowed it.  users wanted to manually control the uploading for several  reasons. not only did users take several pictures of the  same subject and choose only the best ones to keep and  upload, but users also wanted to keep the most private  photos locally on their own device to have better control  over them. it seems that the mindset of most of the users  was not to collect as much as they could but also to think  about presenting the items to the others.   in addition to being in control of the logging, users should  be able to delete content later. additionally, users should  not have to delete items twice. when deleting messages  from the mobile phone, users should be able to choose  whether they want to delete them from the log or only from  the phone’s local memory.  naturally, sharing items highlights privacy considerations  as well. one user mentioned that she tried to ask permission  from all of her friends who appeared in her photos before  she shared them in the web application. the same user  mentioned that one photo was shared by her friend that she  might not have wanted to be shared because of how she  looked in the photo, although this really did not bother her.  this indicates that at least some users feel they need to ask  permission from others who appear in the log whether  information about them can be shared.     experiences of logging text messages  as mentioned, users were in total control of what photos  and videos they uploaded to the system. in contrast, text  messages were automatically logged. it turned out that  logging of the contents of sent and received text messages  was clearly considered the biggest threat to privacy.  there  were users who would rather not have logged the messages  at all and users who wanted the possibility of manually  setting whether a message was logged. users were worried  chi 2010: privacy awareness and attitudes april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 169


  about the text messages being secured by only one  password in the web application.  ”on the other hand, it’s interesting, but the  security risk is so high if there’s something  personal [in the message]. [...] i think i wouldn’t  dare to use this. now i actually got afraid of what  if someone would get to know that [thing  mentioned in a message]. you can see all the text  messages, also the very intimate.” (female, 22)  despite the logging of text messages being considered a  considerable threat to privacy, text messages were also  considered to be among the most interesting content even  by some of those who considered this to be a threat.   “if you think of your own stuff, then the old text  messages [are interesting]. [...] it has been rather  fun to read them.” (female, 21)  to alleviate the fear that others might intercept the content  of the text messages, the content should be stored on the  phone or on user’s own pcs until such messages are shared  with others. sharing and providing views about a friend’s  activities would be more complex to implement, but it  would serve the needs of users who want to be in control of  private data.   the extent users are willing to share their logs  some of the logged information was considered to be very  private, some freely shareable. all the users were happy  that the sharing of calls and messages was disabled in the  web application. the feature was considered to protect  users themselves from accidentally sharing private  information. on the other hand, six of the participants  shared their listening information publicly using a username  in last.fm before the study. thus, many of the users were  willing to share their music listening history automatically  in our system also.  in the system, photos and videos were shared with friends  automatically based on their visibility in flickr. although  photos could have been shared in our web application as  well, this may have given the impression that the sharing  functionality was divided into two places. furthermore, the  fact that users had used flickr for more than one and a half  months before starting to use our web application made  them accustomed to setting the visibility of their photos in  flickr.   this, and the short period of use, resulted in users not really  taking advantage of the manual sharing functionality of the  web application outside the interviews. a couple of the  users shared a few items but mainly as an experiment.  however, the usage during the interviews and the sharing of  photos through the flickr interface gave everyone enough  experience to reflect their expectations on sharing.   users mostly felt that the location of an item can be shared  with the item, and the possibility to share the information  was valued.   ”if i've been sharing photos in irc gallery  [finnish photo sharing web site], the first question  has been where it was taken.” (male, 25)   ”yeah, i've been leaving it there, it doesn't bother  me if somebody sees where i have listened some  music.” (female, 21)  there were also exceptions. when doing something socially  delicate or when sharing the information would reveal the  exact location of someone’s home, the possibility to control  sharing becomes important.  although only few location tracks that were logged were  shared in the trial, motivations sharing them were  mentioned. they seem to fall under the known categories of  motivations for sharing photos described in the literature.  one motivation for sharing past location information was  self-presentation by showing special locations visited  during a trip. an example of this happened during the trial  where one participant shared location tracks from her trip to  stockholm and another user, after finding the tracks,  considered this kind of information to be among the most  interesting content in the web application. another  motivation was more pragmatic: a need to guide friends to a  summer cottage, a place that requires careful navigation.  the possibility to select certain persons to receive the items  was valued and considered to be an aspect where our web  application excels over flickr. for example, when users  have participated in an event with certain friends, they  would like to share the content with exactly those same  friends. when capturing something interesting one has  come across like street art, users might more readily share  their photos with all friends.  changes in user behavior during the trial  logging enables seeing and sharing information about  one’s life that has not been possible before and the literature  has predicted that it will have significant implications for  the users’ sense of privacy. therefore, we were also  interested in how the impact of logging will change users’  normal behavior: whether the logging might either restrict  or increase the activity of the users.  according to the questionnaire, logging seemed to increase  the participants’ activity in content creation. the median of  the answers to the statement, awareness of the data logging  encourages me to actively gain new experiences was 5, a  slight agreement.   users were lent new phones with features that some of them  had not had before. in the first interview, users said that  they had done more with their phones than they had  normally done before. they had, for example, taken more  photos, browsed more web pages and listened to more  music. at this point, using the phones more and creating  chi 2010: privacy awareness and attitudes april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 170


  more content may have been due to the extensive feature set  of the phones, instead of the logging changing users’  behavior. however, members of the group 1 said that  logging had especially increased communication among  them. they made video calls and sent multimedia messages  partly because they anticipated that these items would be  interesting content for browsing later.  using the web application did not seem to cause any radical  changes in the users’ phone use compared with the logging  period. however, some new indications regarding logging’s  ability to alter users’ behavior were mentioned. logging  inspired users to take more photos, listen to more music  with their mobile phones and play with the gps positioning  to get their location logged. one user would have made  more video calls if they had been logged, and another user  had been intentionally trying to get his location recorded.  “sometimes you check your phone on purpose so  that it would set the gps positioning on. for  example on a bus you go to sit by the window.”  (male, 25)  only one of the users mentioned refraining from some  actions because he did not want those to be logged.  otherwise, the logging did not bother users so much that  they would have reported avoiding performing their normal  routines because of it. this is also shown in the results of  the questionnaire as the median of the answers to the  statement, awareness of the logging makes me restrict my  doings was 2, showing that participants mostly disagreed.  discussion and conclusions  in this paper, we focused on the user experience of mobile  phone activity and context logging.  we conducted an  eleven week-long field study of 13 participants to explore  users’ experiences of the logging. we found that the  perceived value of logging consisted mostly of hedonic  aspects of the ux. only a few pragmatic benefits were  experienced by the users in this setup within the short  period of time that this logging system was used.  yet, even  without considerable pragmatic benefits, the value of  logging outweighed the concerns that it presented.  one of the fundamental questions of lifelogging is whether  it is better to be able to control the logging and delete  content at will or whether it is better to log everything.  when having control, the user may miss logging some of  the precious moments or may delete some mementos  considered valuable at a later date. without this control, the  most private and sensitive pieces of information as well as  the memories that should be forgotten are logged.   users were not disturbed by the logging. many were a bit  uneasy in the beginning, but this feeling was forgotten in a  couple of days. none of the concerns kept users from  continuing the logging.  as the logging extends to cover  more of the users’ actions and the logged information  becomes more meaningful, the concerns may increase.  as predicted in previous literature [1,5], our results  indicated that the logs inspire and help people to analyze  their life. the information logged and the life patterns that  the logs reveal were considered interesting by the users ─  not only by the loggers themselves but also by the friends  with whom the contents were shared.   it became apparent in the study that the username-password  combination is not considered secure enough to protect  such sensitive information that an extensive lifelog would  contain. more effective methods of information security  must be used because the information collected is  considered valuable and worth logging and preserving. in  order to make users feel more secure, information that is  not shared should be stored locally. in addition, the  information shared on a server should be synchronized with  the local repository so that users do not have to repeat  actions twice.  in this study, the automatic logging of text messages was  considered to be the biggest privacy threat. for photos and  videos, users were able to decide which items they  uploaded to the log and many of these items they chose to  keep only on the phone. to feel more secure, users wanted  a similar kind of control for messages. as the preferences  of what information should be logged automatically and  what should be logged only by manual selection vary from  user to user, flexible controlling options are needed.   in addition to having the ability to control logging, users  want versatile options for sharing the logged information  with others. users prefer sharing some information  automatically such as listening history, sharing some  information at will and keeping some information private.  furthermore, the more versatile the logged information  becomes, the more users want to control with whom the  information is shared.   another challenge of lifelogging is the unavoidable logging  of other people’s lives around the user. abuse of this  information cannot be totally avoided if someone decides to  do harm. however, there were clear indications in our study  that users are even more careful and protective with the  information about others than about themselves.   inevitably, in our study, the experience of using a new  phone, as well as flickr and shozu was mixed with the  logging experience. participants did, however, own quite  advanced phones (e.g., many had other s60 smart phones or  an iphone), and many of them were active users of similar  web sites before they participated in our study, so the  change was not that significant.  considering everything, the results of the study suggest that  using the mobile phone and its sensor-enabled context  recording capabilities as the basis of lifelogging is a  promising approach worth developing further. the variety  of content logged in the study was limited, but the system  already provided value for the users. in further studies, we  aim to extend the variety of logged information to the types  suggested by our users and to information available from  chi 2010: privacy awareness and attitudes april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 171


  other services on the internet. furthermore, longer field  studies are needed to examine how the value and use of the  logged information changes over time and what kind of  changes logging will cause to users’ behavior and phone  usage.  ux is naturally culture-dependent, and this applies also to  the highly pervasive lifelogging. the prevailing social  norms and the conception of privacy vary between cultures,  and the implications of these differences should be taken  into consideration in the design of lifelogging systems.   as lifelogging is developed further, it is important to  carefully consider the ethical and cultural issues and  involve users in all stages of the development process. we  argue that most users would prefer limited lifelogging that  they can control over the full-fledged storing of everything  a person sees, hears and does.  acknowledgements  we thank minna wäljas (tut) and joel hakulinen (nrc)  for their contribution to the study, tero hakala, joonas  itäranta, kimmo roimela, ville-veikko mattila, rich  hankins and the c3 team from nrc as well as mahtava  development for their contribution to developing the  system. we would also like to thank thomas olsson for his  insightful review of the paper draft as well as brian  watson, david murphy and nina mäki-kihniä for their  language help. lastly, we express our deepest gratitude to  the participants of our study.  references  1. allen, a. dredging-up the past: lifelogging, memory  and surveillance. university of chicago law review, 75,  1 (2008), 47 – 74.   2. bush, v. as we may think. atlantic monthly 176, 1  (1945), 101-108.  3. cheng, w.c., glubchik, l., kay, d.g. total recall: are  privacy changes inevitable? in proc. carpe’04, acm  press (2004), 86 – 92.  4. clarkson, b. life patterns: structure from wearable  sensors. phd thesis, mit, 2002.  5. czerwinski, m., gage, d., gemmell, j., marshall, c.,  pérez-quiñones, m., skeels, m. and catarci, t. digital  memories in an era of ubiquitous computing and  abundant storage. communications of the acm 49, 1  (2006), 45-50.  6. dodge, m., kitchin, r. ‘outlines of a world coming into  existence’: pervasive computing and the ethics of  forgetting. environment and planning b: planning and  design, 34 (2007), 431 – 445.  7. dumais, s., cutrell, e., cadiz, j., jancke, g., sarin, r.,  and robbins, d. stuff i've seen: a system for personal  information retrieval and re-use. in proc. sigir 2003,  acm press (2003), 72-79.  8. gemmell, j., bell, g. and lueder, r. mylifebits: a  personal database for everything. communications of the  acm 49, 1 (2006), 88-95.  9. gemmell, j., williams, l., wood, k., lueder, r., bell, g.  passive capture and ensuing issues for a personal  lifetime store. in proc. carpe ’04, acm press (2004),  48 – 55.  10. hassenzahl, m. the interplay of beauty, goodness, and  usability in interactive products. human-computer  interaction, 19 (2004), 319–349.  11. hassenzahl, m. the hedonic/pragmatic model of user  experience. in proc. workshop towards a ux manifesto  (2007). http://141.115.28.2/cost294/upload/506.pdf.  12. hassenzahl, m., tractinsky, n. user experience – a  research agenda. behaviour & information technology,  25, 2 (2006), 91 – 97.  13. millican, t. iam: experiences with persistent video  recording. in proc. carpe’05, acm press (2005).  14. myka, a. nokia lifeblog - towards a truly personal  multimedia information system. in proc. mdbis 2005,  gesellschaft für informatik (2005), 21-30.  15. norman, d. turn signals are the facial expressions of  automobiles. addison wesley (1992).  16. o’hara, k., tuffield, m., shadbolt, n. lifelogging:  issues of identity and privacy with memories for life. in  proc. identity and the information society (2008).  17. olsson, t., lehtonen, m., pavel, d., väänänen-vainio- mattila, k. user-centered design of a mobile  application for sharing life memories. in proc. mc'07  (mobility'07), acm press (2007), 524 – 531.  18. olsson, t., toivola, h., väänänen-vainio-mattila, k.  exploring characteristics of collective content – a field  study with four user communities. in proc. chi 2008,  acm press (2008).  19. rhee, y., kim, j. and chung, a. your phone  automatically caches your life. interactions 13, 4 (2006),  42-44.  20. roto, v., rautava, m. user experience elements and  brand promise. the fourth international engagability &  design conference (idec4). (2008).  http://research.nokia.com/files/ uxelements-v2.pdf.  21. van house, n. et al. the uses of personal networked  digital imaging: an empirical study of camera phone  photos and sharing, in proc. chi 2005. acm press  (2005), 1853-1856.    chi 2010: privacy awareness and attitudes april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 172
