

       what do people ask their social networks, and why?                 a survey study of status message q&a behavior  meredith ringel morris, jaime teevan  microsoft research  redmond, wa, usa  {merrie, teevan}@microsoft.com  katrina panovich  massachusetts institute of technology  cambridge, ma, usa  panovich@mit.edu    abstract  people often turn to their friends, families, and colleagues  when they have questions. the recent, rapid rise of online  social networking tools has made doing this on a large scale  easy and efficient. in this paper we explore the phenomenon  of using social network status messages to ask questions. we  conducted a survey of 624 people, asking them to share the  questions they have asked and answered of their online social  networks. we present detailed data on the frequency of this  type of question asking, the types of questions asked, and  respondents’ motivations for asking their social networks  rather than using more traditional search tools like web  search engines. we report on the perceived speed and quality  of the answers received, as well as what motivates people to  respond to questions seen in their friends’ status messages.  we then discuss the implications of our findings for the  design of next-generation search tools.  author keywords  social search, social networks, q&a, web search.  acm classification keywords  h.5.4 information interfaces and presentation –  hypertext/hypermedia: user issues.   general terms  design, human factors, measurement  introduction  social networking sites are often thought of as places to catch  up on the personal information and current activities of social  ties. in addition to social and playful uses, however, many  users are harnessing their social networks as sources of  information and productivity, for example by using business- oriented networking tools like linkedin or beehive [7]. in  this paper, we examine how people fulfill information needs  using general-purpose social tools by using status messages  to ask questions rather than to simply describe their current  status.  social networking services provide a source of information  that is complementary to that provided by search engines; the  former provides information that is highly tailored to an  individual and comes from a highly trusted source, while the  latter provides objective data from a variety of sources on a  variety of topics. understanding for what question types and  topics people turn to their social network rather than search  engines, and their motivations for doing so, can help in  designing next-generation search tools that integrate both  search engine and social functionality.  to better understand social network q&a exchanges we  conducted a survey of 624 people using social networking  services like facebook and twitter. our survey covered  topics such as the prevalence of asking and answering  questions via status-message updates, the types and topics of  the questions asked, the speed and quality of the answers  received, and the motivations people have for asking and  answering questions on social networks. our analysis also  explores the influence of properties of the question and  demographics of the asker on response speed and quality.   we begin by discussing related work on topics such as social  networks and online question-asking services. we then  describe our survey’s methodology and findings. the results  we present from our survey contribute the first detailed data  on the use of social networks for question-asking. we  conclude by discussing the implications of these findings for  the design of social search systems.  related work  to place the research presented here in context, we first give  an overview of social networking services and studies of  their use. we then discuss the phenomenon of social  searching and show what q&a tools have revealed about it.  social networking systems  social networking services enable users to specify other users  that they are connected to. examples of popular social  networking services include facebook, twitter, and  myspace. a december 2008 survey by the pew internet  project [20] found 35% of adult internet users in the u.s.  have a profile on a social network, as do 65% of u.s. teens.   researchers have explored many aspects of how social  networking services are used. for example, gilbert and  karahalios [12] studied which properties of connections  between facebook users were useful in predicting weak or  strong offline social ties. lampe et al. looked at how  university students’ perceptions and use of facebook  changed over time [19]. they found students used facebook  “to get useful information,” but did not explore whether this  permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies  bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  chi 2010, april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, georgia, usa.  copyright 2010 acm  978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00.  chi 2010: using your social network april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1739


       “useful information” consisted primarily of social awareness  information or if it also included content gleaned from  practices such as question asking. joinson [18] identified  seven primary uses of facebook via a survey of 241 users .  question-asking was not specifically asked about, but the  behavior may be part of the identified use of status updating.  honeycutt and herring [15] studied 36,000 public messages  shared via twitter, doing an in-depth analysis of 200 tweets  containing the “@” symbol. they found three of the 200  were meant to “solicit information” from others. dimicco et  al. [7] reported on the use of beehive, a corporate social  networking tool. they found employees used the tool for  “caring,” “climbing,” and “campaigning,” but did not  mention whether beehive was used to ask or answer  business-related questions. these are just a few examples of  the many studies of social networks; however, none have  focused on the use of social networking systems to ask  questions, which is the focus of our work.   social search  broadcasting a question to one’s social network is one way to  find information online; other common methods include  using a search engine or emailing a question to a particular  person. the term social search refers broadly to the process  of finding information online with the assistance of social  resources, such as by asking friends, reference librarians, or  unknown persons online for assistance. social search may  also involve conducting a search over an existing database of  content previously provided by other users, such as searching  over the collection of public twitter posts, or searching  through an archive of questions and answers, such as in the  answer garden system [1]. some researchers have built  special tools to integrate social information with search  engine use, such as heystaks [26], a browser plug-in that  enables users to mark search results as relevant; these results  are then boosted in the rankings of socially connected users  who do searches on similar topics.  a collaborative search [23] is a social search where several  users share an information need and work together to fulfill  that need, in some cases using tools like searchtogether  [22]. although people who ask questions via social network  status messages do so to enlist the help of others, they are not  engaged in collaborative search as the information need  belongs solely to the question asker; they are, however,  engaged in the broader phenomenon of social search.  social search behavior appears to be common. in a 2008  survey, wells and rainie [29] found people used a mixture of  internet search and social resources (e.g., phone calls and  face-to-face meetings) to answer many types of questions.  torrey et al. [28] found that craft-artists kept their social  networks informed of current projects in the hopes of  receiving “gifts of information,” including pointers to  relevant online resources that might benefit their projects.  some researchers have proposed formal models to describe  the interplay of online information seeking with the use of  social resources. for example, pirolli [24] developed a model  of social information foraging, and evans and chi [9]  described the various stages in the search process when users  engaged with other people.  to compare social search with more traditional search, evans  et al. [10] conducted a study in which eight participants  completed two search tasks. for one task, participants used  only non-social, online resources (e.g., search engines), while  in the other they used only social resources (e.g., calls or  emails to friends, and social network or q&a sites). evans et  al. found that in the social condition targeting questions to  specific friends versus asking a social network had similar  outcomes in terms of task performance; questions posed to  the social network received more answers, but those targeted  to individuals received in-depth answers. we build on these  findings to show additional factors that affect perceived  answer speed and utility on social networks via a survey of  624 people.  online q&a tools  the internet offers many opportunities for people to ask and  answer questions online. there are, for example, third-party  applications that facebook users can install designed  specifically for q&a purposes (e.g., “my questions”  [slide.com]). we focus on the use of status messages for  question asking, which does not require the installation of  additional applications and thus has a lower barrier to entry.  expertise-finding systems help users identify people with a  particular type of knowledge, which can be beneficial for  question-asking. collabio [5] is a tagging-based facebook  game designed to augment a network with metadata that can  be used for expertise finding. aardvark [vark.com] is a  commercial expertise-finding system. upon registering users  tag themselves with areas of expertise and provide  information about their network. questions are then routed to  members of the asker’s network based on expertise. rather  than focusing on finding a particular expert within one’s  network to direct a question to, we study situations in which  users post questions to their entire network.  venues such as electronic bulletin boards, newsgroups, and  question-answering sites enable users to post questions  targeted either at a particular community or to the world at  large. we refer to sites where users post questions to be  answered by people not known personally as q&a sites.  question asking and answering behavior on q&a sites has  been well studied. for example, harper et al. [13] identified  two categories of questions posted to q&a sites:  conversational questions, intended to spark discussion, and  informational questions, soliciting specific facts.  they found  informational questions have higher archival value.   response times on q&a sites tend to be long. for example,  zhang et al. [30] reported that when expert java users posted  questions to the java developer forum, the average time to  receive a response was nearly 9 hours. hsieh and counts [16]  reported that the average time to receive an answer to a  question posted to microsoft’s live qna site was 2 hours  chi 2010: using your social network april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1740


       and 52 minutes. hsieh and counts also reported that 20% of  questions posted to live qna never received an answer at  all. in this paper, we provide self-report data on the speed of  responses to questions posted on social networks, rather than  q&a sites.   some researchers have explored the factors affecting answer  quality on q&a sites. raban and harper [25] point out that a  mixture of both intrinsic factors (e.g., perceived ownership of  information, gratitude) and extrinsic factors (e.g., reputation  systems, monetary payments) motivate q&a site users to  answer questions. ackerman and palen [2] and beenan et al.  [3] confirmed that intrinsic motivations, such as visibility of  expertise and the feeling of making a unique contribution,  influence participation in such systems. results regarding  extrinsic motivators have been more mixed; hsieh and  counts [16] found market-based incentives did not increase  answer speed or high-quality answers, but harper et al. [14]  found fee-based sites produced higher quality answers than  free sites. in this work, we provide data on users’ satisfaction  with answers from social networks, rather than q&a sites.  there are several factors that differentiate the experience of  asking a question on a q&a site versus on a social  networking site. first, questions on q&a sites can be posted  anonymously (or under a pseudonym), whereas on a social  networking site, the asker’s true identity is known to the  readers of the question. second, the audience of potential  answerers is much smaller on a social networking site than  on a q&a site, since it consists of only the direct contacts of  the asker rather than an entire community or the internet at  large. and finally, social networking sites typically impose a  limit of only a few hundred characters on message length,  whereas many q&a sites allow much longer, more detailed  questions to be posted. in light of these differences, it is  valuable to study question asking behavior on social  networks, since they provide quite a different audience and  experience than q&a sites.  survey methodology  many popular social networking services, such as facebook  and twitter, enable users to write a brief status message,  which is then visible to their connections on the network. for  example, facebook’s status message can be up to 423  characters long; the prompt “what’s on your mind?”  encourages the user to fill in the status box. on twitter,  status updates can be up to 140 characters long, and the  prompt “what are you doing?” is used. a december 2008  survey by the pew internet project [21] found that 11% of  u.s. adults used online status-updating services. we  conducted a survey to explore the ways in which people use  status messages to ask questions of their social networks.   survey content  in addition to collecting basic demographic information and  background information about participants’ use of social  networking services such as facebook and twitter, the  survey asked a series of questions related to question asking  and answering behaviors, such as whether respondents had  ever used their status message to ask a question of their social  network. if they had done so, they completed several follow- up questions about the frequency of this behavior, the types  of questions asked, and the responses received. additionally,  we asked participants who reported asking a question to log  onto the social network and copy and paste an example of a  question they had recently asked into the survey form. we  also asked whether participants had ever answered a question  they had seen posted as someone else’s status message. we  then asked several follow-up questions to understand the  motivation behind choosing to answer or not answer  questions. those who reported answering a question were  asked to log onto the social network and copy and paste an  example of a question they had answered, along with the text  of their answer. as with all survey studies, the reader should  bear in mind the inherent inaccuracies possible in self-report  data.  participants  the survey was completed by 624 people. respondents were  all microsoft employees. a quarter (25.5%) were female,  which is representative of the microsoft population. most  (72.8%) were full-time employees, but 27.2% were  university students working as summer interns. participants  were recruited by advertisements to email distribution lists  about social networking or targeted toward summer interns,  with a response rate of approximately 20%. we specifically  advertised to interns to ensure a diverse perspective  representative of typical social networking system users,  since studies show such tools are heavily used by university  students (a 2008 survey found that over 85% of college  students had at least one social network profile [8]). recent  trends suggest that as social networking becomes more  popular, however, the average age of participants has  increased. for example, the number of adults with social  network profiles quadrupled between 2005 and 2008 [20],  and users over 35 are the fastest-growing facebook  demographic [11]. 28% of respondents were aged 18-25,  40.1% aged 26-35, 25.5% aged 36-45, and only 6.1% aged  46 and over.   participants reported using a variety of social networking  technologies, including facebook, twitter, myspace, orkut,  friendster, and linkedin. facebook and twitter were the  most prominent services, with 98.1% of participants having a  facebook account and 71% having a twitter account. we  therefore focus our discussion of the survey results on these  two services. participants with facebook accounts reported a  median network size of 209 friends, which is slightly larger  service n ev er   r ar el y  a  fe w   tim es  a   m on th   w ee kl y  a  fe w   tim es  a   w ee k  d ai ly   a  fe w   tim es  a   da y  facebook   8.2% 18.0% 14.2% 12.3% 29.0% 7.7% 10.6% twitter 17.6% 19.9% 12.2%   5.2% 16.9% 7.0% 21.2% table 1. percent of respondents who reported updating their  status messages at a given frequency (of 612 facebook users  and 443 twitter users).  chi 2010: using your social network april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1741


       than the average facebook network size of 120 friends [11],  while those with twitter accounts reported a median of 25  followers, which is lower than the average of 85 followers  [17] (the twitter mean follower count of 85 is likely skewed  high by the extremely high number of followers that  corporate and celebrity accounts have). table 1 gives a sense  of how active respondents are in their use of social  networking tools by showing the reported frequency with  which they update their status messages.  our findings should be interpreted in light of possible biases  introduced by the demographic of our survey population. the  demographic issue is somewhat mitigated by the inclusion of  a large number of college interns in the survey sample; the  age ranges and network sizes of our participants were  reasonably close to those of the broader social network user  population. however, our survey population was more tech- savvy and less gender-balanced than the general social  networking audience.  analysis  opinions were reported on a 5-point likert scale, where 5 =  strongly agree and 1 = strongly disagree. statistics involving  likert scale data use non-parametric tests, since participants  may not interpret such scales as equidistant.  to better understand the nature of the example questions  provided by respondents, two of the authors used an affinity  diagramming technique [6] to iteratively develop a  classification scheme for question type and question topic.  participants’ motivations for asking questions of their social  network and for answering questions posed by others were  categorized in a two-phase process, involving first reading all  responses to develop a categorization scheme, and then re- reading all responses to assign them to a category.  significance of differences in the distribution of question  topic and type and reported answer quality according to  demographic properties of the asker are calculated using non- parametric tests (kruskal-wallis and mann-whitney).  the questions people ask  in this section, we report what our survey revealed about the  questions people ask of their social networks. in the  subsequent section we discuss what we learned about the  answers people receive.  rather than merely using social networking services for  entertainment, participants reported using them to find  practical information, indicating agreement (median = 4)  with the statement, “i use sites like facebook and twitter to  get useful information.” half (50.6%) of respondents  reported having used their status messages to ask a question.  we were provided with a total of 249 examples of questions  participants had posted or answered (some participants were  unable to provide an example despite having asked or  answered a question due to inability to locate the example or  privacy concerns). examples ranged from silly (“why are  men so stupid?”) to complex (“point and shoot camera just  died - need to replace it today for vacation tomorrow. tell me  what to buy/not buy. think under $200.”). we examine the  examples we collected to better understand how participants  phrased questions to their social network, the types and  topics of the questions asked, the impact of demographics on  question-asking, and participants’ motivations for asking  their social network rather than relying on some other means  to find an answer.  question phrasing  the questions we collected were generally short. although  twitter allows status updates to be up to 140 characters long,  and facebook up to 423, the collected questions had a mean  length of only 75.1 characters (13.8 words). the majority  (71.9%) consisted of a single sentence (mean = 1.4  sentences). multi-sentence questions often used the extra  sentence(s) to provide additional context about the question,  such as explaining the motivation for asking. for example,  one participant asked, “i'm creating tweetcloud t-shirts for an  event. does anyone have a company i can send the clouds to  and have t-shirts made (not copy print iron-ons)?”  a majority of the examples (81.5%) were explicitly phrased  as questions and included a question mark. for example, one  respondent asked, “should i replace my blackberry with an  iphone, or just upgrade my blackberry?” however, the  remaining 18.5% were phrased in statement form and ended  with a period. questions that were phrased as statements  were often preceded by inquisitive phrases such as “i  wonder,” or “i need,” including, for example, “i need a  recommendation on a good all purpose pair of sandals,  preferably one i can get through zappos.”  although most questions were implicitly directed to the  asker’s entire network (e.g., “how can i type akan symbols  online?”), many (20.9%) used the phrase “anyone” to  explicitly indicate the asker was seeking an answer from any  member of their network. for example, one participant  asked, “anyone know of a good windows 6 mobile phone  that won't break the bank?” questions were also often  directed to “someone,” “somebody,” or “anybody.” some  askers scoped their question even more specifically, directing  it at a subset of their network that had a particular expertise.  for example, one participant asked, “developer? take the  survey http://[url].” another asked, “hey seattle tweeps:  feel like karaoke on the eastside tonight?”   question types  we also looked at the type of questions people asked of their  social networks. by type we refer to the nature of the  question. table 2 shows the categories and prevalence of the  different question types observed. the table also illustrates  each type using an example from the data.  the most popular question types, recommendation and  opinion questions, both ask for subjective information; an  opinion question asks for a rating of a specific item, while a  recommendation question is an open-ended request for  suggestions. factual knowledge questions, on the other hand,  have objective answers. rhetorical questions correspond to  chi 2010: using your social network april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1742


       the “conversational” category noted in harper et al.’s study  of q&a sites [13]; these are aimed at prompting discussion  rather than eliciting practical answers. invitations ask others  to attend an event, favors request services from others, offers  ask whether others are interested in receiving an object or  service, and social connection questions ask to be introduced  to people having specific characteristics.  question topics  in addition to looking at the question type, we also looked at  popular question topics. question topic refers to the subject  matter of the question. for example, the question may be  about technology or music. table 3 shows the categories and  prevalence of question topics, and illustrates each topic using  an example from our data.  technology questions were the most popular, and include  those on computer hardware, software, programming, social  media, mobile phones, cameras, and cars. entertainment  questions were also popular, and include questions about  movies, tv, the arts, books, sports, and music. home &  family questions include those on children, pets, health,  cooking, gardening, and real estate. professional questions  are about jobs, education, and events such as professional  conferences. places includes questions about travel and about  local transportation. restaurants include questions about  dining out at restaurants, cafes, and bars. current events  refers to questions about the news as well as questions about  ongoing phenomena (e.g., “anyone else notice that bit.ly  seems to be acting up today, slow to load, stats seem wildly  off?”). the shopping category includes non-technology- related shopping questions, such as those about fashion, gifts,  or services. the ethics & philosophy category includes  musings on philosophical or moral issues.  the distribution of topics our participants reported posting to  social networking sites differs from those explored through  search engines. a 2004 study of america online’s query logs  [4] found that the most popular query topics were shopping  (13%), entertainment (13%), pornography (10%), computing  (9%), health (5%), travel (5%), games (5%), and home (5%).  in particular, popular search engine topics, such as  pornography and health, are ones our participants reported  they would avoid asking of their social networks, since they  are too personal. our participants also reported that religion,  politics, dating, and financial issues were topics they were  not comfortable asking their social networks about. the  prevalence of technology questions in our dataset is likely  due to the survey population, which consisted of employees  at a technology company; we would expect this proportion to  be lower for other populations.  who asked which questions  we explored how characteristics of the question asker, such  as the asker’s demographics and social network use, related  to the types and topics of questions they asked. table 4  breaks down topic and type accordingly.  demographics  we found no significant gender differences in the types of  questions asked. gender had a greater impact on question  topic, with men asking a higher proportion of technology- oriented questions (z = -20, p = .044), and women asking  more home & family questions (z = -2.5, p = .013).   age related to the type of questions people asked. younger  participants were more likely to ask invitation questions than  the older age groups (χ2(3, n = 230) = 13.4, p = .004). in  contrast, younger participants were less likely to seek  recommendations (χ2(3, n = 230) = 9.7, p = .021). age had  no significant impact on question topic.  social network use  we also investigated whether the social network used to post  the question influenced question topic or type. our  participants reported asking a much higher proportion of  technology questions on twitter (z = -5.9, p < .001). on  facebook, participants were more likely to ask questions  about home & family (z = -3.2, p = .001) and about  entertainment (z = -2.8, p = .006).  question type percent example  recommendation 29% building a new playlist – any ideas for good running songs?  opinion 22% i am wondering if i should buy the kitchen-aid ice cream maker?  factual knowledge 17% anyone know a way to put excel charts into latex?  rhetorical 14% is there anything in life you’re afraid you won’t achieve?  invitation 9% who wants to go to navya lounge this evening?  favor 4% needing a babysitter in a big way tonight… anyone??  social connection 3% i am hiring in my team. do you know anyone who would be interested?  offer 1% could any of my friends use boys size 4 jeans?  table 2. breakdown of question types for the 249 example  questions survey respondents had asked their networks.  question topic percent example  technology 29% anyone know if wow works on windows 7?  entertainment 17% was seeing up in the theater worth the money?  home & family 12% so what’s the going rate for the tooth fairy?  professional 11% which university is better for masters? cornell or georgia tech?  places 8% planning a trip to whistler in the off-season. recommendation on sites to see?  restaurants 6% hanging in ballard tonight. dinner recs?  current events 5% what is your opinion on the recent proposition that was passed in california? shopping 5% what’s a good mother’s day gift?  ethics &  philosophy 2%  what would you do if you had a week to  live?  table 3. breakdown of question topics for the 249 example  questions survey respondents had asked their networks. an  additional 4% fell into the “miscellaneous” category.  chi 2010: using your social network april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1743


       to explore whether more frequent users of social networking  tools asked different questions than less frequent users, we  asked participants to self-report the frequency at which they  updated their status message; those who updated once per  week or more we characterized as frequent users, and those  who updated their status less often than once per week as  infrequent users. infrequent users were more likely to ask  questions related to rare events or special occurrences, such  as travel (z = -1.8, p = .059), and health (z = -3.8, p < .001).  the greater incidence of health questions may be due to  infrequent users having different understandings of the norms  and etiquette on such systems.   motivation for asking  participants who reported having used their status message to  ask a question answered a follow-up survey question  requesting a free-text explanation of why they had chosen to  satisfy their information need by asking their social network  rather than (or in addition to) using a search engine. table 5  shows common themes in the 242 reasons people gave, with  specific responses exemplifying each.  the most common reason to search socially, rather than  through a search engine, was that participants had more trust  in the responses provided by their friends. a belief that social  networks were better than search engines for subjective  questions, such as seeking opinions or recommendations, was  also a common explanation.   many respondents, however, also held a (sometimes  incorrect) belief that search would not work for their  question, even when they had not actually attempted to use a  search engine. for example, of the 15.2% of participants who  did not trust a search engine to answer their question, 24.3%  suggested it would not be able to find up-to-date information  on current events. a smaller percentage of respondents had  first turned to a search engine, but had failed in their attempt  to find the information.  people also chose to post questions to their networks because  they knew their networks formed a specific audience that  they believed to be particularly knowledgeable about a topic,  and because they wanted to connect socially with others by  simultaneously advertising their current interests as well as  fulfilling an information need. many appreciated that their  social network was familiar with additional context, such as  knowledge of their location, family situation, or other  preferences.   some respondents perceived that asking their social network  resulted in better answer speed and/or answer quality than  asking a search engine. however, other respondents  acknowledged that the social network might take longer to  return a response, but that this was acceptable because their  information need was non-urgent. others preferred to ask  their social network because it was easy; they felt that  reading through a set of search results to find the most  appropriate one was too cumbersome, and preferred to be  delivered a pre-packaged answer by a friend.  finally, some chose to ask their questions socially, rather  than to a search engine, because they felt the former was  more fun, and that there was no harm in trying, since  updating one’s status is a relatively low-cost interaction.  many of these motivations could apply to q&a sites, which  are a more traditional way to ask questions online. the  preference for using a social network rather than a q&a site  may be a trust issue; participants reported that they trust  people in their network to help them answer questions  (median = 4) significantly more so than they trust people on  the internet that they do not know to answer questions  (median = 3) (z = -8.82, p < .001).  gender age network used frequency of use    male female 18-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 facebook twitter infrequent frequent   count 157 77 51 93 71 15 126 49 205 29  opinion 23.6% 22.1% 21.6% 18.3% 28.2% 33.3% 18.3% 30.6% 20.7% 23.4%  recommendation 31.2% 29.9% 13.7% 35.5% 38.0% 26.7% 31.0% 28.6% 24.1% 31.7%  factual knowledge 15.3% 13.0% 9.8% 22.6% 9.9% 6.7% 11.1% 26.5% 13.8% 14.7%  rhetorical 8.9% 16.9% 19.6% 6.5% 11.3% 20.0% 14.3% 6.1% 13.8% 11.2%  q ue st . t yp e  invitation 10.8% 10.4% 23.5% 10.8% 2.8% 0.0% 15.1% 4.1% 24.1% 8.8%  technology 35.0% 22.1% 33.3% 26.9% 32.4% 40.0% 15.9% 61.2% 24.1% 31.7%  entertainment 17.8% 19.5% 19.6% 24.7% 11.3% 6.7% 24.6% 6.1% 24.1% 17.6%  home & family 8.3% 19.5% 7.8% 14.0% 14.1% 6.7% 19.0% 0.0% 13.8% 11.7%  professional 10.8% 9.1% 7.8% 9.7% 11.3% 6.7% 7.9% 10.2% 3.4% 11.2%  places 8.9% 5.2% 15.7% 5.4% 5.6% 6.7% 7.9% 6.1% 13.8% 6.8%  restaurants 5.7% 7.8% 0.0% 8.6% 7.0% 13.3% 7.9% 2.0% 6.9% 6.3%  current events 6.4% 2.6% 0.0% 8.6% 5.6% 0.0% 5.6% 10.2% 3.4% 5.4%  q ue st io n  t op ic   shopping 3.2% 7.8% 5.9% 2.2% 7.0% 6.7% 4.8% 4.1% 3.4% 4.9%  table 4. breakdown of question topics and types by demographics. we exclude the favor, social connections, and offer question types  and the ethics question topic from this chart, since those categories represented only a small fraction of questions. shading indicates  that prevalence of a topic/type differed significantly for the given demographic category (p < .05).   chi 2010: using your social network april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1744


       the questions that got answered  in addition to providing information about question asking on  social networks, participants also provided information about  question answering. they shared with us their subjective  experience with the speed and utility of the replies they  received to their question, and provided information about  when they themselves chose to answer and not answer  questions that others had posted. many participants reported  having answered questions. three-quarters (73.4%) had seen  a question posted as a status message by another member of  their network; of those, nearly all (93.4%) said they had  answered such a question on at least one occasion. here, we  first examine factors affecting answer speed and utility,  followed by an exploration of the factors that motivate  question answering.  perceived answer speed and utility  all but 6.5% of the questions shared via the survey received  an answer, which is much lower than the percentage of  unanswered questions found on q&a sites [16]. it is  possible, however, that respondents were biased towards  sharing examples that had received responses. overall, the  93.5% who received a response reported that their questions  were answered promptly; 24.3% received a response in 30  minutes or less, 42.8% in one hour or less, and 90.1% within  one day.  generally participants reported expecting fast response times  and receiving slower responses than expected. a third (31%)  expected a response within 15 minutes or less, but only  15.7% received one that quickly; 62.5% expected a response  within one hour, but only 39.8% got one. expectations and  reality approached each other at the one day mark, with  88.9% of participants expecting a response within a day or  less and 83.9% receiving one. despite the discrepancy  between expected and reported answer speed, getting a  response within one day seemed acceptable to most people,  with 89.3% reporting they were satisfied with the response  time they experienced.  the responses gathered via a social network appear to be  very valuable. when asked to characterize whether or not the  responses they received were helpful, 69.3% of participants  who received responses reported they found the responses  helpful, while 30.7% reported receiving unhelpful responses.  we examined whether common question properties explored  earlier in the paper, such as phrasing and question type,  influenced the self-reported speed or utility of the responses  received. we found that question length influenced response  utility, with the questions that had fewer sentences receiving  more useful responses than those with many sentences (r = - 0.13); we found no correlation between question length and  response speed. it may be that multi-sentence inquiries  appear more similar to a “regular” status update and less like  an actual question. the use of punctuation and scoping terms  did not correlate strongly with reported response speed or  utility.  question type also influenced response utility, with rhetorical  questions receiving a far smaller share of all helpful  responses (5.6%) than of non-helpful ones (30.1%) (z = -5.0,  p < .001); this may be because it is not possible to answer a  question of this nature in a helpful manner, or because  answerers do not perceive that the asker truly desires a  response to this type of question. response times were  distributed unevenly by question type (χ2(7, n = 234) = 14.8,  p = .039); the question types receiving the fastest reported  responses were requests for factual knowledge,  recommendations, and opinions, with 19.6%, 40.0%, and  22.7% of responses received within one hour or less,  respectively, as compared to the average reported response  rate within one hour of 12.5%. question topic did not  influence response time or utility.  we also explored whether demographic traits of the asker  influenced answer speed and utility. gender and age did not  significantly influence either answer speed or helpfulness.   motivation percent example survey responses  trust 24.8%  - because i trust my friends more than i trust  strangers.  - people that i know are reputable.  subjective  questions 21.5%  - a search engine can provide data but not an  opinion.  - it has no definite answer, it’s more about  collecting views rather than finding specific info. belief  search  engine  would not  work  15.2%  - because search engine technology doesn’t work  that well yet.  - i’m pretty sure a search engine couldn’t answer  a question of that nature.  - because search engines don’t have breaking  news.  - search engines aren’t updated often enough.  specific  audience 14.9%  - friends with kids, first hand real experience.  - better visibility among expert users of sql  server.  connect  socially 12.4%  - i wanted my friends to be aware that i was  asking the question.  - i wanted to ask the question but also express my  frustration to my social network.  answer  speed 6.6%  - quick response time, no formalities.  - needed information asap.  context 5.4% - friends know my tastes. - search engine is not personalizable.  failed  search 5.4%  - i tried searching and didn’t get good results.  - a quick search on the search engine didn’t give  me any useful results.  easy 5.4%  - it’s easier. results are targeted… don’t need to  sift out the ‘junk’.  - there are too many choices on the web, i wanted  something more filtered.  - didn’t want to look through multiple search  results for answers.  answer  quality 4.1%  - human-vetted responses.  - better quality results some of the time.  no harm 3.3% - no cost.  fun 2.1% - more fun.  non-urgent 1.7% - i didn’t need an answer straight away.  table 5. survey respondents’ motivations for asking their  social network rather than (or in addition to) conducting a  web search. some responses fell into multiple categories, so  percentages total to more than 100% (out of 242 responses).  chi 2010: using your social network april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1745


       finally, we explored whether the asker’s social network  habits, such as the network posted to or the frequency of  updating one’s status, affected the answers received. we  found no difference in the reported answer speed or utility  regardless of whether the question was posted to facebook or  twitter. the frequency of using the social network holds  more importance, however, with those who update their  status frequently receiving faster responses (z = -2.1, p =  .033); 87.0% of frequent updaters reported receiving  responses in one day or less, while only 64.5% of infrequent  updaters received responses within one day.  motivation for answering (and not answering)  we asked a follow-up question to participants who reported  having answered questions they saw posted in others’ status  messages, inquiring about what motivated them to respond to  such requests. 408 respondents answered this question. table  6 shows the categories of motivations to answer, the percent  of responses in each, and example responses.  the most common motivation given for responding to a  question was altruism. expertise was the next biggest factor,  with respondents being motivated because they felt they had  special knowledge of the topic being asked about. another  factor influencing motivation to respond was properties of  the question itself, including whether the question’s topic is  considered interesting, whether the question seems urgent,  and whether the question is scoped to an audience the  answerer considers himself part of.   the nature of the relationship with the asker was an  important motivator, with closer friends more likely to get  answers. the desire to connect socially with others also  prompted responding to questions, in order to rekindle old  friendships, maintain current ones, and create new ones.  many people were motivated to answer questions because  they had free time; in these cases, they would answer if the  question was quick to reply to, and because it entertained  them to do so.   some people were motivated to answer by a feeling that they  were earning social capital. they believed if they answered  others’ questions, their own might be more likely to receive  replies in the future. similarly, some answered out of a  feeling of obligation, because they had received help in the  past or because they felt indebted to a particular community.  finally, humor and ego were also motivating factors that  compelled some people to answer questions.  we also asked participants to describe why they would  choose not to answer status-message questions. we received  224 free-text responses on this issue. the most common  reason for not answering was, not surprisingly, not knowing  the answer (42.0%). the public nature of answering seemed  to factor into how confident people had to be in their answer  to be willing to volunteer it. for example, one respondent  commented, “i don’t feel like i know enough and [am] afraid  to be wrong in public,” and another noted, “[i] don’t want to  be on record as an expert in anything i’m not.”  private topics were another demotivator (24.1%) (“too  personal for public profile”), although some indicated that  they might respond privately to such inquiries rather than  responding within the social networking tool (“not in a  public setting. i might send an individual response in  email.”). some respondents identified more specifically what  topics were considered private; the most common topics  mentioned were religion (“i don’t like talking religion with  those outside my circle”), politics (“questions which might  be sensitive (like political opinions)”), sex and dating (“i’m  not comfortable publically answering sexual questions in a  public forum.”), personal details about friends or family  (“[questions requiring] details on my children that i may not  want in a public forum”), money (“requests for cash”), and  health (“if you want a health opinion, visit your doctor”).  many indicated they would prefer a face-to-face or personal  request, and ignored questions directed broadly to the  network-at-large, as indicated by comments like, “i would  rather be asked directly,” and, “my lack of response is  motivated by the impersonal nature of the questions.”  discussion  we have presented detailed data from a survey of 624  facebook and twitter users on the topic of asking and  answering questions via social network status messages. this  data provides valuable insights into the motivations for social  searching behavior; however, when interpreting these  findings, it is important to bear in mind the limitations of our  unusually tech-savvy survey demographic and of self-report  data in general. supplementing this survey data with  objective log-based studies or with interviews to explore  motivation percent example survey responses  altruism 37.0%  - just trying to be helpful.  - being friendly.  - social goodness.  expertise 31.9%  - if i’m an expert in the area.  - [it depends on] my knowledge of the subject that  the question refers to.  properties  of question 15.4%  - interest in the topic.  - [if] it is … time sensitive.  - is it directed at me?  nature of  relationship 13.7%  - if i know and like the person.  - if i know the person well  connect  socially 13.5%  - connect with others.  - keeps my network alive.  free time 12.3% - boredom/procrastination. - it’s fun to answer.  social  capital 10.5%  - favor marketplace.  - it creates social currency.  - i will get help when i need it myself.  obligation 5.4%  - a tit-for-tat.  - it’s part of being in a community of trusted  people.  humor 3.7% - thinking i might have a witty response.  ego 3.4%  - being wanted.  - looking good.  - wish to seem knowledgeable.  table 6. reported motivations for answering questions seen in  network members’ status messages (out of 408 responses).  some responses fell into multiple categories.  chi 2010: using your social network april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1746


       specific findings in greater depth are promising directions for  future work. in this section, we reflect on what our findings  suggest about the tradeoffs in satisfying information needs  through more traditional online tools, such as search engines  and q&a sites, versus via online social networks. we then  discuss the implications of our findings for the design of  improved search technologies.  tradeoffs of social networks, search engines, and q&a  a variety of online tools, notably search engines and q&a  sites, are designed specifically to help users satisfy  information needs. however, our survey found that many  people are turning to social networking tools for this purpose,  even though such tools were designed to facilitate social  connectedness and awareness rather than information- seeking. our findings suggest there are several factors  differentiating information seeking using traditional online  sources versus social networks:  type of information need: the strength of social networks  seems to be in their ability to provide answers to questions of  a subjective nature; our respondents especially preferred  social sites over search engines for opinion and  recommendation questions. however, social networks were  seen as inappropriate for questions on overly personal topics,  such as health, dating, religion, and finance; q&a sites may  be more attractive to users who have subjective questions on  highly personal topics, since they afford greater anonyminity,  while search engines’ strengths are in providing more  objective answers on a variety of personal and impersonal  topics.   trust: although q&a sites and the blogs and rating sites  indexed by search engines provide subjective data such as  reviews and recommendations, people tend to trust the  opinions of people they know rather than the opinions of  strangers, motivating them to turn to their networks.  response time: although search engines have near- instantaneous response times, obtaining a timely response  requires entering an optimal query, which may be difficult in  some situations. responses on social networks were often  received within less than an hour of posting (40% in our  sample), and nearly all questions received responses within  one day. response times and rates reported by our survey  participants were comparable to or faster than those reported  for q&a sites [16, 30]. for non-urgent information needs,  particularly those where forming an optimal query is  challenging, waiting a few minutes or hours for an answer  seems acceptable. our findings also suggest that properties of  the question influence response speed. for example, shorter  questions and questions asking for subjective, rather than  objective, answers received quicker responses; by carefully  tailoring the questions they pose to social networks, users  may be able to obtain better answers more quickly.  effort: questioning in natural language, rather than figuring  out optimal queries for a search engine, lowers the barrier for  asking questions on social networks. the short character  limit on social network status messages helps ensure such  inquiries are low-effort, whereas the longer messages offered  by q&a sites suggest they are appropriate for more intricate  questions. receiving a small number of answers from their  social network, rather than needing to triage a large set of  search results, was appealing to our respondents.   personalization: respondents appreciated that members of  their network knew a great deal about their backgrounds and  preferences, and were thus able to provide answers tailored  based on this context. search engines and q&a sites do not  generally offer this capability. personalized search algorithms  (e.g., [27]) cannot yet achieve the same degree of  personalization as a close friend.  secondary benefits: in addition to achieving their primary  goal of satisfying an information need, asking a question via  social networking tools offered two additional types of  benefits not present in search engines and q&a sites. first,  by posting a question, participants were also advertising their  current interests and activities to their network, creating  social awareness. second, participants found visiting social  networking sites to be fun and pleasurable.   implications for design  considering why people use social tools offers insights into  improving search engines. for certain question types, notably  recommendations or opinions, on impersonal topics such as  dining, travel, shopping, and entertainment, it may be  beneficial for search engines to return not only traditional  results, but also results from the user’s social network. such  results could be obtained by searching through the profiles of  a user’s friends or through their friends’ past status updates in  order to return search results that include suggestions of  specific friends who might be knowledgeable about a topic.  alternatively, the search engine could automatically post a  status update on behalf of the user, and integrate any  responses received through the social network into the search  results as they arrive. this latter approach would be most  effective if the speed of receiving social answers could be  optimized, as may be possible through careful question  phrasing. further study would be needed to validate these  approaches.   respondents also seemed to turn away from search engines  due to the effort of triaging large numbers of results. many  search engines have begun to offer “instant answer” features  (i.e., typing a query such as “atlanta weather” into many  search engines returns a local weather forecast, rather than a  set of hyperlinked results). our findings suggest that it may  benefit search engines to expand the range of question types  for which instant answers are offered.   survey participants appreciated the context inherent in  interactions with their social network. this finding suggests  that enhancing the effectiveness of personalized search  algorithms is an important area of further study for  improving the usability of search engines.  finally, participants enjoyed the fun and social aspects of  posing questions to their networks. by incorporating social  features directly into search engines, such as the ability to  chi 2010: using your social network april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1747


       actively collaborate with others while searching (e.g., [22]),  search engines may be able to turn a mundane experience  into one that provides both intellectual and social benefits.  conclusion  we investigated question asking behavior on popular social  networking services by surveying 624 people on their use of  these services, the types of questions they have asked, and  the types of questions they have answered, as well as their  motivations for using social networks in this manner. our  analysis explored the relationships between answer speed and  quality, properties of participants’ questions (type, topic, and  phrasing), and properties of participants themselves (age,  gender, and social network use habits).  our findings paint a rich picture of the reasons people turn to  social networks, rather than search engines or q&a sites, for  certain classes of information needs, and the factors affecting  the outcome of these inquiries. this understanding paves the  way for a new generation of search tools that merge the  speed and breadth of search engines with the trustworthiness,  personalization, and high engagement offered by social  media.  references  1. ackerman, m. and malone, t. answer garden: a tool for  growing organizational memory. sigois 1990, 31-39.  2. ackerman, m. and palen, l. the zephyr help instance:  promoting ongoing activity in a cscw system. chi  1996, 268-275.  3. beenan, g., ling, k., wang, x., chang, k., frankowski,  d., resnick, p. and kraut, r.e. using social psychology  to motivate contributions to online communities. cscw  2004, 212-221.  4. beitzel, s.m., jensen, e.c., chowdhury, a., grossman,  d. and frieder, o. hourly analysis of a very large  topically categorized web query log. sigir 2004, 321- 328.  5. bernstein, m., tan, d., smith, g., czerwinski, m. and  horvitz, e. collabio: a game for annotating people  within social networks. uist 2009, 97-100.  6. beyer, h. and holtzblatt, k. contextual design: defining  customer-centered systems. academic press, 1998.  7. dimicco, j., millen, d., geyer, w., dugan, c.,  brownholtz, b. and muller, m. motivations for social  networking at work. cscw 2008, 711-720.  8. educase center for applied research. the ecar study  of undergraduates and information technology 2008.  chapter 6: social networking sites.  http://www.educause.edu/ers0808   9. evans, b. and chi, e. towards a model of understanding  social search. cscw 2008, 485-494.  10. evans, b., kairam, s. and pirolli, p. do your friends  make you smarter? an analysis of social strategies in  online information seeking. ip&m, in press.  11. facebook.com official statistics page. retrieved sept.  12, 2009. http://facebook.com/press/info.php?statistics.   12. gilbert, e. and karahalios, k. predicting tie strength with  social media. chi 2009, 211-220.  13. harper, f.m., moy, d. and konstan, j.a. facts or  friends? distinguishing informational and conversational  questions in social q&a sites. chi 2009, 759-768.  14. harper, f.m., raban, d., rafaeli, s. and konstan, j.a.  predictors of answer quality in online q&a sites. chi  2008, 865-874.  15. honeycutt, c. and herring, s. beyond microblogging:  conversation and collaboration via twitter. hicss ’09.  16. hsieh, g. and counts, s. mimir: a market-based real-time  question and answer service. chi 2009, 769-778.  17. huberman, b., romero, d.m. and wu, f. social  networks that matter: twitter under the microscope. first  monday, 14(1-5), january 2009.  18. joinson, a.n. looking at, looking up, or keeping up with  people? motives and use of facebook. chi 2008, 1027- 1036.  19. lampe, c., ellison, n. and steinfield, c. changes in use  and perception of facebook. cscw 2008, 721-730.  20. lenhart, a. adults and social network websites. pew  internet and american life project, january 2009.  21. lenhart, a. and fox, s. twitter and status updating. pew  internet and american life project, february 2009.  22. morris, m.r. and horvitz, e. searchtogether: an  interface for collaborative web search. uist 2007, 3-12.  23. morris, m.r. and teevan, j. collaborative search: who,  what, where, when, and why. morgan & claypool,  2009.  24. pirolli, p. an elementary social information foraging  model. chi 2009, 605-614.  25. raban, d. and harper, f. motivations for answering  questions online. in new media and innovative  technologies (2008).  26. smyth, b., briggs, p., coyle, m. and o’mahoney, m.  google shared: a case study in social search. umap  2009.  27. teevan, j., dumais, s. and horvitz, e. personalizing  search via automated analysis of interests and activities.  sigir 2005, 449-456.  28. torrey, c., churchill, e. and mcdonald, d. learning  how: the search for craft knowledge on the internet. chi  2009.  29. wells, a.t. and rainie, l. the internet as social ally.  first monday, 13(11), november 3, 2008.  30. zhang, j., ackerman, m., adamic, l. and nam, k.  qume: a mechanism to support expertise finding in  online help-seeking communities. uist 2007, 111-114.     chi 2010: using your social network april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 1748
