

    transforming clinic environments into information  workspaces for patients  kenton t. unruh1, meredith skeels1, andrea civan-hartzler1, wanda pratt1,2  1biomedical & health informatics  university of washington  seattle, wa 98195, usa  {ktunruh, mskeels, andreah, wpratt}@uw.edu    2 information school  university of washington  seattle, wa 98195, usa    abstract  although clinic environments are a primary location for  exchanging information with clinicians, patients experience  these spaces as harsh environments to access, use,  exchange, and manage information. in this paper, we  present results from an ethnographic-inspired study of  breast cancer patients actively interacting with information  in clinic environments. through observations and  interviews, we observed information interactions in  awkward physical positions; inefficient use of existing  clinical space; separation of patients from their information  and lack of support for collaborative document viewing.  these factors compromised patients’ abilities to manage  their information work when they experienced bursts of  information exchange, lack of advance information,   fragmented attention, and heightened stress in clinic  environments. to overcome these challenges, we identify  formative strategies to focus attention, encourage  collaboration, and improve communication in clinical  settings.   author keywords  workspaces, personal health informatics, collaboration,  cscw, surface computing, medical informatics  acm classification keywords  h5.m. information interfaces and presentation (e.g., hci):  miscellaneous. j.3 life and medical sciences: medical  information systems  general terms  design, human factors  introduction  going to the doctor is a major health activity. for example,  united states residents attend 1.1 billion outpatient visits to  the doctor annually [26]. medical advances have made  hospital stays shorter and specialty care done in the  outpatient setting has increased. in the domain of oncology,  many patients who are undergoing active treatment spend  the majority of their time away from the clinic without  immediate access to their clinicians. this time away from  the treatment center is punctuated by visits to the treatment  center and bursts of information exchange with their  clinicians. these visits occur in clinic environments, such  as exam rooms and treatment areas.   when patients enter clinic environments, they are expected  to access, use, learn, communicate, and remember  information while interacting with their clinician. despite  these expectations, clinic environments have been designed  without adequate understanding of patients’ work— particularly their information work—necessary to meet  these expectations. although we see the results of patients’  work (e.g., questions asked, information about side effects  communicated, treatment plan placed in purse) we do not  see the work itself. thus, patients do what star and strauss  call background work: a type of invisible work where “the  workers themselves are quite visible, yet the work they  perform is invisible or relegated to a background of  expectation” [30]. to lift the veil from patients’ information  work in clinic environments, we report results of an  observational study of breast cancer patients in exam rooms  and treatment areas during active cancer care.  patients as understudied actors in clinic  environments  recognizing the influence of physical environment on  clinical workflow, researchers study clinic environments to  identify and remove barriers that impede clinicians’ work  [14,22]. for example, by re-designing patient-care rooms  and installing acuity-adaptable beds in a cardiac care unit to  accommodate a range of cardiac services—from coronary  critical care services to coronary step-down services,  henrich et al. [13] dramatically improved nursing  workflow. findings demonstrated 90% reduction in patient  transports, 70% reduction in medication errors, and  improvement in patient satisfaction with clinical care. from  a patient’s perspective, studies of clinical settings have  largely focused on stress [29], noise [1,6], and aesthetics  [24] of clinical environments. for example, one well- known study suggests that rooms with a window to the  outside may influence recovery from surgery [32].     permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies  bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise,  or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior  specific permission and/or a fee.  chi 2010, april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, georgia, usa.  copyright 2010 acm  978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00.    chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 183


    researchers also have investigated patient-physician  communication in clinical settings. medical studies  document the challenges of remembering information after  clinical interactions. relying on memory alone is not a  viable strategy because patients remember as little as 50%  of what clinicians tell them during clinical encounters [17].  yet, when patients are provided with recordings or notes  from a consultation with their clinician, at least 60% of  patients read or listen to those materials [23]. within  medical informatics, studies of how technology in clinic  workspaces influences patient-provider communication  were prompted by the introduction of computers into the  exam room [9,25]. frankel et al. [9] described how the  technology created a barrier to communication when the  screen was visible only to the clinician, but could become a  shared artifact if the screen was re-oriented so the patient  could also see it. technology has been envisioned that  would facilitate discussion between patients and clinicians  during a consultation by enabling shared multimedia health  information and interactive tools [31]. yet, no studies have  taken a deep look at patients’ information work in clinical  environments or how these environments support or inhibit  that work.  studies have been done of patients’ information work  outside of the clinic, examining what patients do in their  everyday lives to manage their health and how their efforts  can be supported [20]. for example, frost and smith [10]  suggest that when diabetics supplement the blood sugar  levels they collect with pictures they take of their dietary  behavior, the reasons for shifts in their blood sugar levels  are made more apparent. mamykina et al. [19] highlight the  value of having patients monitor their routine dietary  activities and then share those records with their clinicians  to encourage reflective thinking about their dietary choices.  other research looks at supporting the needs of the elderly  and their family care-givers. for example, consolvo and  towle [7], by observing in situ interactions between elderly  and their family caregivers rough home-based ambient  displays, identified a range of unsuspected dynamics and  contextual factors that such technology must accommodate.  lastly, other researchers highlight the critical role that  supportive technologies can play in the day-to-day lives of  patients for both routine personal health management [20]  and for critical health problems, such as cancer [12].  in contrast to most studies done within clinical settings, the  above studies examine patients’ needs by interacting with  patients directly rather than (a) relying on secondary  measures (e.g., patient satisfaction) or (b) focusing largely  on clinicians’ work and workflow to improve patient care.  although this user-centered approach to studying patients  has not been widely adopted in the field of medicine,  researchers in the design community have called for active  study of patients and their needs [3], especially in clinical  contexts [4].  adopting this user-centered perspective of studying  patients, but in clinical environments, we answer two  questions:  (1) what is it that patients actually do—or try to  do—to maximize their work in clinic environments such as  exam rooms and treatment areas? (2) what are the  implications for design directions to improve patients’  capacities to work in clinical environments?  answering these questions will help us devise new ways to  support a patient’s ability to access information, learn, and  communicate in clinic environments and thus enhance their  ability to understand and play an active role in their care.  we begin by describing our study context and methods.  then, we describe our findings in three sections: (1)  challenges preparing for clinic visits (2) clinical  environments as harsh information workspaces for patients,  and (3) post-visit challenges. we end by discussing three  design directions to mitigate the challenges of information  interactions in clinical environments.   methods  through flyers and word-of-mouth, we recruited a  convenience sample of 14 patients (referred to as p1, p2,  etc.) actively undergoing treatment for stage 0 to stage 3  breast cancer. at the time of the study, patients were  undergoing surgery, radiation or chemotherapy treatment.  participants ranged in age (37-73) education (no high  school diploma to post-graduate degree), career  (unemployed, blue-collar and white-collar jobs) and  socioeconomic status. thirteen (13/14) participants  described themselves as caucasian.  we followed each participant for 6 weeks through multiple  methods as part of a larger study of personal health  information management. for each participant, we  conducted an initial home visit, two telephone interviews, a  clinical observation, and a final home visit. during the  home visits we conducted in-depth interviews and artifact  reviews (e.g., personal notes taken during clinic  appointments) to document patients’ experiences in clinic  environments. we conducted 30-minute telephone  interviews between in-person contacts (e.g. home visits and   clinic observations). the spacing of the home visits and  telephone interviews allowed us to probe issues related to  clinic appointments over time, capturing information  activities before, during, and after clinic observations. we  asked open-ended questions (e.g., ‘how will you prepare  for your next appointment?’) and probed patient-raised  issues specifically in subsequent interactions (e.g., ‘how  well did your question list work during your appointment?’)  the observations occurred in exam rooms and  chemotherapy infusion areas. we audio recorded the  communication, recorded field notes, sketched the physical  environment, and took pictures—as appropriate—during  observations. transcripts of observations were time- stamped. we also conducted post-observation debriefings  to clarify and extend observational findings as part of the  observation. these debriefings occurred in ad-hoc locations  (e.g., exam rooms while patients waited to be seen, waiting  rooms after appointments, hospital coffee shops).  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 184


    transcripts of exam-room communication and post  observation interviews and field notes were analyzed for  barriers that inhibit patients’ information interactions during  clinic visits as well as information activities that occurred  preparing for and following up from clinic visits.   challenges in preparing for clinic visits    patients emphasized the importance of interaction time with  their clinicians during clinic visits. they conceptualized  clinicians as interactive, expert resources who were critical  to their current and future health, but to whom they had  limited access. for example, p4 emphasized how these  clinical interactions were “very important” because “there’s  a limited period of time that i get to spend with them  [clinicians].” clinic environments—either exam rooms or  chemotherapy infusion areas—became the default setting in  which these interactions occurred during active cancer care.   patients prepared in advance to maximize their interaction  time with clinicians. as p2 explained, “when i went into the  doctor to talk about [her health status and potential  treatments]…i'd be armed with a little bit of information.”   the better she could prepare, the more she could get out of  the interaction.   acknowledging the importance of working together with  their clinician, patients provisioned information for  clinicians in advance. patients created lists of questions  they wanted to ask because, as p4 noted, “for me i'll forget  [the questions when] i'm just sitting there like a deer in the  headlights just because my brain doesn't seem to process  [it].”  patients compiled personal health histories and health  status reports to update clinicians on their evolving health  status while away from the treatment center. patients who  received care from multiple clinicians compiled updates on  care procedures and recommendations they received from  other providers involved in their care. the general  perception was that in a distributed system of cancer care,  patients were responsible for ensuring the continuity of  their own care because clinicians do not always have a  complete view of patients’ health and treatment status.  patients also developed strategies in advance of  appointments to reference and capture information during  clinical interactions. they typically compiled portable  ‘bundles’ of information that contained three types of  artifacts (1) questions to ask, (2) information to provide  clinicians, and (3) paper and pens to capture portions of   information exchange for future reference. patients like p3  and p13 pursued a different strategy for information  capture. they arranged to bring another person along to  their appointment to help them remember what was  discussed or to take notes for them. we returned to these  strategies throughout the results and discussion sections.   challenges during the clinic visit  given these strategies, how well could patients leverage  information to maximize their interaction time with  clinicians in clinic environments?  none of the 14 patients  in our study implemented all of their information  management strategies well all of the time. during our  observations, we identified two sets of challenges that  inhibited patients’ capacities to use information effectively  while interacting with clinicians in clinic environments: (1)  physical challenges of clinic environments and (2)  demanding characteristics of patients’ information work in  these settings.  physical challenges of clinic environments  our findings point to four types of challenges of clinic  environments that interfered with patients’ abilities to carry  out their important information work in clinic  environments. in this section we detail these challenges  from the patients’ perspective, using anonymized photos,  field-note sketches and illustrative quotes from participants.   interacting with information in awkward physical positions  while clinicians used desks and counter space to lay out  their information, patients had no such space for managing  their information. consequently, they struggled to carry out  their information work in awkward physical positions. we  identified four ergonomic poses in which patients  conducted their information work.      figure 1. upright exam table pose   the first pose was the ‘upright exam table pose’ (figure 1).  for example, of her 60 minutes on the exam table, p8 spent  57 minutes sitting upright on the exam table while different  clinicians cycled through the exam room. balancing her  question list and her pencil on her lap, p8 attempted to  maintain eye contact with  clinicians, record notes,  communicate with hand motions, track her list of questions,  and collect documents—which she held in place with her  thigh— from clinicians.   the second pose was the ‘reclining exam table pose’  (figure 2a). for example, between exams, p1 laid back on  the exam table to review documents in preparation for her  impending discussion with her surgeon:  “the closer the  proximity to reading the document to the actual discussion  of the document, the better the result is [for] personal  communication.” after several minutes, her hands and arms  began to shake from holding up the papers. moreover, she  lacked easy access to annotation functionality, stating that  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 185


    she should have had a pen and a surface to write on  because, “i think that's a better form of document review.”    figure 2.   (a) reclining exam table and (b) upright chair pose  the third pose was the ‘upright chair pose’ (figure 2b). for  example, during her 60 minute pre-mastectomy  consultation, p3 sat in a chair asking and answering  questions, referencing her calendar, and tracking her  question list in her notebook. in the midst of dialog—and  holding multiple papers on her lap—p3 fumbled through  her handbag to retrieve her calendar to reference precise  appointment dates to aid discussion of her treatment plan.   the fourth pose was the ‘reclining chair pose’ (figure 3).  for example, while balancing her lunch and papers on her  lap and side-tray, p13 underwent chemotherapy treatment,  received and reviewed a copy of her lab results, queried her  clinician about her test results, discussed emergent side  effects, underwent an examination to determine extent of  deterioration of her toe nails, and discussed a plan to  monitor and manage the side effects with her clinicians.    figure 3. reclining chair pose  separation of patients from their information  the alternative to handling calendars, notebooks, and  papers in awkward positions is to position them elsewhere  in the room. however, placing these information resources  elsewhere separated patients from their information during  clinical communication. thus, patients either (a) conducted  communication with their clinician without the benefit of  their information artifacts, or (b) broke their attention with  ongoing information exchange to retrieve their out-of-reach  information artifacts. examples of the latter case included:   • retrieval from counter top: in the midst of responding to  questions from an oncology nurse assessing the patients’  current health status, p9 reached precariously over from  the exam table in an attempt to reach her notebook  (figure 4). after teetering on the edge of the exam table,  she obtained the notebook but only after it fell to the  floor in the process.    figure 4. retrieval from counter top  • retrieval from floor: with no obvious location to place  her briefcase that contained material she prepared to  reference, p1 set it on the floor next to the exam table.  midway through the consultation, p1 breaks her attention  with the surgeon to retrieve her pathology report and  question list.  • retrieval from hook behind door: while receiving an  unexpected treatment recommendation, p14 jumps off  the table to retrieve her calendar and notebook located in  her bag hanging from a door hook. she took significant  time to re-settle herself to take notes. the clinicians’  explanation of health status and treatment options  continued without pausing.    figure 5: de-facto division of space  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 186


    inefficient use of space  we observed that all 14 patients used only a small portion  of available space in clinic environments. whether based on  instructions from clinic staff or social norms, patients  occupied chair(s) and the exam table, whereas clinicians  utilized desks and counter space. figure 5 illustrates the de- facto division of space that we observed. despite the  presence of flat surfaces for writing and internet-enabled  computers, patients and their family members interacted  with information in constrained spaces in awkward physical  positions. even when chairs were placed next to counter- tops which could be used as a writing surface, they only  accommodated either left-handed or right-handed patients,  but not both.  lack of support for collaborative document viewing  recognizing the importance of visual information to  clinical explanations and collaborative problem-solving,  patients and clinicians tried to work with documents  together. constrained by space, they struggled to position  themselves and documents for collaborative viewing and  interaction. for example, we observed:   • p1’s surgeon perched on a stool, straining to hold  documents in the air, pointing to illustrate his points, and  drawing diagrams upside down so they would be right- side up to explain detailed surgical options for p1 and her  husband.   • p9 squinted over her clinician’s shoulder at a small  screen as her clinician demonstrated—via hand and  mouse movements—how to navigate an nih-funded  website relevant to her question.   • p15 was pleased that her surgeon illustrated his clinical  logic on paper—“he gave it to me a lot more thorough  [than oral presentation]”, but had difficulty viewing the  document upside down while the surgeon illustrated his  verbal points.  demanding characteristics of patients’ information  work in clinic environments   the physical challenges represent only one facet of the  problems patients encountered interacting with information  in clinical environments. another important facet is the  demanding characteristics of the information work that  patients need to perform in clinic environments. these  characteristics exacerbated their problems interacting with  information. these characteristics must be considered  before new technology can be designed to help patients  carry out their work in clinic environments. in this section,  we detail these characteristics and describe the negative  impact they have on patients’ abilities to carry out their  important information work.   bursty nature of communication with clinicians  a key characteristic of patients’ information work in clinic  environments is ‘bursty’ communication with clinicians.  patients experienced bursty-ness in two forms. the first  form is the sheer speed of information conveyed during oral  conversation. we observed how patients encountered bursts  of highly technical information at rates upwards of 200  words per minute. for example,  • p5’s medical oncologist explained the plan to mitigate  side effects of treatment at 195 words per minute.  • p11’s surgeon detailed available knowledge of her  current health status and recommended procedures at 200  words per minute.  • p12’s medical oncologist presented details of a clinical  study for which she was eligible, at 210 words per  minute.  • p14’s surgeon described clinical treatment options,  including the option of enrolling in a clinical trial, at 204  words per minute.   the rate at which patients received this information exceeds  normal conversational rates (i.e., 125-175 words per  minute) and also exceeds recommended instruction to  ensure comprehension [34]. unfortunately, as the amount  of information clinicians convey increases, so does the  amount that patients forget [17].  the negative impact of these bursts of information was  painful to observe. for example, p14 radically  misunderstood the treatment options presented to her. she  eventually refused treatment at that institution because she  was convinced that the only way she could be treated there  was to enroll in the clinical trial being described to her: “i  ain't gambling with my boob… i don't like the radiation  lottery.”  the second form of bursty-ness is the quickness with which  clinicians enter clinic environments—where the patient is  waiting—and commence information exchange with  patients. we observed a repeated pattern where patients sit  an exam room, hear a knock at the door, and were  immediately engaged by a clinician on oncology topics with  little ramp-up time. to illustrate, consider the following  exchange between p11 and her clinician that occurs  suddenly after a 9-minute wait in an exam room.  [knock at door & clinician enters]  clinician:  hello.  patient:    hi, how are you today?  clinician:  good, how are you?   patient:     who are you?  clinician: my name is [name removed]. i’m one of the   oncology fellows working on the team. i’m going  to talk to you and examine you and then [another  clinician] will come in. so i had a chance to look  what has been happening, what the left side of  breast cancer and it was node positive and it  was, estrogen receptor positive and her-2  negative, nottingham 3[inaudible] seeing you  for neoadjuvant cmf which is chemotherapy -   chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 187


    patient:   okay, before neoadjuvant, what did you say? i  missed it entirely.   although the rate of communication in this exchange  occurs at a manageable conversational rate, p11 still has  trouble ‘catching up’ to the conversation. the clinician had  been reviewing her information outside of the exam room  and was well-prepared for a quick entry and launch into a  detailed discussion of the patients’ health status and  treatment. in contrast, p11 was in a kind of resting state in  the exam room. she tried—but failed—to keep up with the  initial conversation in the context of the unpredictable  entrance of the clinician. p11 also lacked information about  how the conversation would start and which clinician(s) she  would see.   lack of information before entering the clinic environment  the second characteristic of patients’ information work is  the lack of information before entering clinic environments.  patients’ capacities for managing bursts of communication  were negatively influenced by lack of information prior to  entering the clinic environment. without knowledge of  what specific information would be discussed, patients  operated in reactive—instead of proactive—modes of  interaction. consequently, patients experienced:   • unexpected requests to recall information: in response to  the question: “how much cytoxin are you taking?”  unprepared, p11 responded: “um, i don't remember what  it is.” nurse asks p11: “400 [mg]?” laughing nervously,  p11 says: “i don't even know.”  • inability to prepare: p7 explained how she could not  prepare for her appointment with her oncologist because:  “this isn’t an area i have any expertise in at all and i’m  not even sure what’s appropriate [to ask or discuss].”  • on-the-fly information seeking: without knowledge of  what would be discussed in advance, p7 noted that  “questions will just sort of come out of just being there  and listening to [oncologist] and answering her  questions. that’ll trigger other questions.”  • unexpected switching of clinicians: p4 noted how her  oncologist and the nurse “switch back and forth.”   although they played different roles in her care and she  targeted topics specifically for her oncologist, he  sometimes “just walked in” unpredictably.  fragmented attention and distractions  patients’ capacities for managing bursts of information  exchange were further complicated by multiple, concurrent  activities unfolding in the clinic environment. specifically,  patients experienced fragmented attention when attempting  to:  • receive instructions, reconstruct past events, and answer  questions while undergoing physical exams: for  example, p11 attempted to respond to questions about her  treatment schedule and medication refills, receive  detailed instructions on side effect management, and  discuss treatment options and upcoming diagnostic tests  while undergoing a physical exam.  • tracking and recording information while concentrating  on communication with clinicians: for example, we  observed p8’s ongoing attempts to focus on verbal  information exchange with her surgeon, while  simultaneously tracking a checklist of her questions and  recording notes in a notebook held in her lap (see figure  1). post-observation analysis of her checklist revealed  that she failed to track her agenda consistently.  specifically, p8 failed to check off some items the  surgeon addressed and checked off other items even  though they were not addressed. after the surgeon left,  p8 exclaimed: “i forgot to ask [breast surgeon about] my  bandages.”  • scanning and referencing material during clinical  assessments: for example, we observed p9 fumbling with  her notebook and flipping pages while trying to answer  specific questions about treatment dates, current  medications, and side effects. in a post-observation  debriefing immediately after this interaction in the exam  room, p9 admitted to multi-tasking: “no, i wasn’t  actually looking [for details about health history]…i was  actually looking for my note page when she was [asking]  about the dates… i wanted to have my questions ready to  ask… i was moving on my questions, not hers.”  these findings are problematic because fragmented  attention (e.g., task switching between listening, note- taking, tracking agendas, reaching for information) reduces  that amount of information that is assimilated and later  recalled [5].  heightened stress associated with clinic environments  patients sometimes experienced heightened stress when  interacting in clinic environments. patients described stress  in relation to a wide variety of factors including the  physical environment itself and activities—such as physical  exams, discussion of sensitive topics, or delivery of ‘bad  news’—that occur in this environment. through  observations and interviews we documented how patients  experienced stress associated with:  • anticipatory anxiety: p1, a ceo of a financial services  firm, described how “you walk into an appointment  already scared, already having half convinced yourself  that the worst is about to happen…you can't listen as  fully… the stress of being in these meetings, even for  someone like me that functions well in high stress  environments, whoosh.”  • unexpected information: the hands and arms of p14, an  airline professional, shook (she was visibly upset) as she  heard the unexpected news that she would require  radiation in addition to surgical treatment, while she tried  to listen and take notes on the exam table.  • unpleasant surroundings: p9, a small business owner,  noted the challenges of communicating in an exam room:  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 188


    “it’s kind of sterile… and you’re in a gown… you start  feeling like a piece of meat.”  • time pressures: p4, a registered nurse, —said “i have to  be quick and i better know what i'm talking about  because they only have so much time to spend with me  and so i think i get a little more anxious, maybe a little  more flustered or nervous probably.”  these perceptions of the clinic environment as a highly- charged and stressful atmosphere further exacerbate known  challenges of processing information conveyed by  clinicians, such as anxiety [18], level of technical language  [15], and  treatment side effects, such as “chemobrain” [11].   post-visit challenges  given the constraints of the physical environment and  characteristics of patients’ information work, what were the  impacts on patients after returning home?  during post- observation debriefings and subsequent interviews, we  documented the downstream impacts of trying to do their  information work in harsh clinical environments.  for  example, we documented:  • de-contextualized notes:  asked to explain her notes, p11  couldn’t remember why she had recorded information  about a genetics book in her notes from her doctor’s visit.  did the doctor recommend it?  was there a particular  chapter to look at?  how did this book relate to her  specific health condition?    • information fragments:  reviewing her notes at home  with the interviewer, p2 realizes that she took notes on  multiple scraps of paper that were hard to keep together  after she left the appointment.  • unanswered questions:  p8 was leaving the treatment  center when she realized she forgot to ask an important  question about how to manage her surgical drains  embedded in her body.  • conflicting memories:  debriefing at home, p4 and her  friend discovered that they remembered the doctor saying  different things about p4’s treatment regimen.   • needs for clarification & new question formulation: p11  noted how “it takes a lot to process it so i don't even  know if i have a question related to it [until later]…i  need to get back in touch with her to … make sure i  understand the information about the probability of  …these other [genetic] mutations.”  as researchers, we watched these impacts unfold in clinic  environments. however, the patients usually didn’t identify  them until after they returned from the treatment center.  thus, they were left with the responsibility to fill in the  information gaps for themselves or to make phone calls to  the clinic to request additional consultation.  designing effective information workspaces  how can we transform clinic environments into effective  information workspaces for patients? although we identify  two obvious solutions—(1) physical re-design of clinical  environments and (2) increasing the number and duration of  clinical appointments—we believe these solutions are  impractical. instead, we propose technology-based design  directions based on common information spaces, surface  computing, and meeting capture to focus attention,  encourage collaboration, increase preparation, and improve  information interactions given existing constraints. in  addition, we suggest strategies to mitigate—either directly  or indirectly—the challenges patients’ encounter in clinic  environments, including fragmented attention, lack of  advance information, and the negative impact of emotions  on information interactions.  common information spaces for bridging perspectives  effective information interactions in clinical environments  require a shared patient-clinician perspective on what and  how information is discussed. researchers in the field of  cscw note that cooperation of different actors requires the  construction of a common information space where  information and expectations are shared [28]. adopting the  concept of common information spaces helps to guide  design thinking because it (a) reframes the challenges  patients encounter in clinic environments in terms of  clinician-patient collaboration, (b) acknowledges the  challenges of fostering shared knowledge and problem- solving efforts among actors distributed across space and  time, in this case patients who spend the majority of their  time away from the treatment center and interact only  periodically with clinicians, and (c) encompasses design  solutions that leverage the interaction space before, during,  and after appointments to maximize face-to-face  interactions.   to support a common information space between patients  and their clinicians, we propose three design directions to  mitigate specific challenges.  first, to improve patients’  access to advance information and reduce the impact of  bursty communications about unexpected topics, we  propose a suite of lightweight applications to facilitate  collaborative agenda creation and management. prior to  appointments, patients and clinicians could push agenda  items and relevant information to a shared application  space. patients and clinicians could use this information to  prepare, thereby reducing the reactivity patients experience  and maximizing information exchange during the  appointment. this feature capitalizes on—and extends— patients’ ongoing efforts to prepare by facilitating  awareness of patient and clinician actors’ agenda and  information prior to face-to-face interactions.  second, to improve information sharing and collaborative  document viewing during appointments, we propose  strategically-placed interactive displays to integrate data  from different sources and make information visually  accessible in constrained exam-room environments. for  example, collaborative agendas prepared in advance could  be pushed automatically to large displays within the clinic  environment, thus increasing shared responsibility for the  agenda, minimizing patients’ anxiety associated with  communicating their concerns, and reducing patients’ urges  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 189


    to multi-task (e.g., monitor the progress of their agenda  while listening) during clinical communication.  further,  patients and clinicians could continue to co-create  information drawn from in-house clinical medical records  (e.g., treatment plan) and personal health records (e.g., side  effect trends) to align their two perspectives of the patient’s  health status and treatment plan. thus, interactive displays  extend the virtual common information space into clinical  environments, bridging perspectives across pre-visit  preparation and in-situ information access during the visit.  building this feature set requires surface computing  strategies for collaboration.  third, to free patients from the burden associated with  learning and recording new information during intense  clinical interactions, we propose systems to help patients  clarify information after they return home. using a common  information space especially designed for this purpose,  patients could review information and post targeted follow- up questions with clinicians. the questions could be  contextualized with explicit links to supporting information  captured from the information exchange in the clinic. such  functionality has the potential to reduce the burden of  asking all questions on-the-fly as new information is  presented in a distracting clinical environment. building  this feature set requires meeting capture strategies to  facilitate information re-use.  surface computing for collaborating   surface computing has the potential to address the many  challenges patients face during their clinic visits and  encourage patient-clinician collaboration around visually- accessible information. for example, exam rooms are small  and often have one small monitor set up on a desk that is  ideal for viewing and use by one person, usually the  clinician (see figure 2). however, exam rooms also contain  considerable surface area (e.g., walls, counters, cabinets,  and pull-out trays) that could be transformed into surfaces  to display and manipulate information. a small device that  projects large images and uses computer vision to enable  touch-based interactions could potentially turn exam room  surfaces (e.g. wall, cabinet sides, exam table) into  collaborative, visual workspaces [35] accessible when  sitting or lying down. enriching conversation with  visuals—especially if patients and clinicians review,  diagram, or annotate artifacts together—is a potentially  powerful means to improve comprehension and facilitate  shared understandings. for example, incorporating a visual  representation (e.g., flow chart of options) into the  discussion of clinical trials might have helped identify and  correct p14’s radical misunderstanding of her treatment  options.   moreover, researchers studying surface and tabletop  systems have already developed solutions for two types  problems that occur during interactions in clinical  environments. the first problem is fragmented attention  patients experience when attending to emergent  conversation and information artifacts at the same time.  physicians and patients both struggle to make eye contact  during discussions and simultaneously capture notes, look  up information, or remember to track questions on a  question list. wang et al. [33] found tabletop solutions that  allowed collaborators to make eye contact while still  interacting with the information on the virtual surface. we  believe such strategies can be adapted to surface computing  applications in exam rooms and treatment areas.  the second problem is inefficient space utilization in exam  rooms. in our study, patients inhabited small ‘territories’ of  available space, often in awkward physical positions, even  when space better-suited to the information interaction  remained unutilized. availability of large interactive  displays could help clinicians and patients make better use  of available space and break down existing territorial  boundaries between clinician space and patient space in  clinical environments. for example, instead of p9 ‘hanging  back’ behind her oncologist straining to gaze over her  shoulder to view a small screen as the oncologist explains  how to navigate through a chemotherapy website, she could  view the website on a large, easily seen surface display  while standing side-by-side with her clinician. sitting or  standing in space usually occupied by clinicians (e.g., desk  area, counter-top area, or back-wall area—see figure 2), the  patient could navigate the website herself—collaborating  with the clinician—facilitating memory and her ability to  re-find the information later. she could also save or send  the website to herself for use at home or to share with  others. thus, strategic placement of interactive displays to  maximize ease-of-use can help patients and clinicians better  utilize available space in clinic environments. techniques  such as clearly labeled patient-designated controls and  dedicated virtual workspaces for patients within the  displays could encourage patients to use the technology,  even in spaces that they do not usually occupy [33,27].  meeting capture for information re-use   to address the demanding characteristics of patients’  information work in clinic environments, patients require  tools to capture and re-use information exchanged in time- limited appointments. one of the biggest dilemmas for  patients is how to record oral information amidst  distractions (e.g., undergoing physical exam), competing  demands (e.g., listening to new information), and  heightened anxiety in clinical environments.  automated meeting capture in co-located environments has  largely been studied in workplace settings, but we  anticipate that both explicit and implicit capture strategies  developed in these studies could be invaluable in the clinic  environment. ju et al [16] demonstrated how small  interactive group spaces—not unlike clinical  environments—can be instrumented for explicit, user- initiated capture of white-board activity and ongoing  implicit capture of audio and image data over time. in clinic  environments, implicit capture strategies could aid anxious  or overwhelmed patients.  at the very least, such patients  would leave the clinic with a complete record of the  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 190


    agenda, audio, and visuals used during the visit that they  can review later. explicit capture will help reassure patients  that they are in fact capturing important moments, such as  the current state of the white board at a particular point in  time.  after capture, further research should explore how to help  patients efficiently recall and re-use information after  returning home. for example, p14 might be reluctant to  listen to the entire visit. instead, they might just want to  replay information about specific treatment options  discussed during that visit. in workplace settings, people  rarely want to sit through a meeting for a second time and  research is underway to provide better summaries of  meetings and more robust ways to locate when action items  were addressed in a recorded segment [8]. clinic visits have  enough similarities to workplace meetings that the  technology developed for meetings also applies to this new  setting. however, clinic visits have substantial differences  that make the need for this technology, and the potential  impact, much greater. for example, patients struggle to  document their consultations with clinic staff and recognize  that doing so jeopardizes their abilities to fully participate  in the conversation at the moment. patients routinely walk  away with questions that we hypothesize they would seek  to answer with the appropriate meeting capture technology.  designs for automatically inferring agenda items and  helping people quickly re-find segments addressing specific  health topics could tremendously improve the patients’  experiences. allowing patients to find the section of the  meeting they have questions about without forcing them to  review, and relive, the entire meeting will lower the barrier  to information re-use. the current techniques for  identifying agenda items require training data and this will  be a challenge in a setting where it is difficult to further  burden specific patient-physician pairs with training during  meetings. post-meeting review and annotation is a  possibility, but carries the emotional burden previously  mentioned. the techniques used by ehlen et al. [8] could  potentially be used to train on a particular oncologist’s  meetings to annotate meetings patients have with that  oncologist. while more research is done on automatic  identification, implicit capture coupled with explicit capture  holds promise for patients who are currently unable to  simultaneously devote all their resources to participating in  conversation and to documenting for later.  limitations of the study  our ethnographic-inspired study of patients in clinic  environments has several limitations. for example, our  participants were women with breast cancer diagnoses.  patients confronting other health problems may encounter  different problems. nevertheless, the clinic environments  we observed were remarkably generic. for example, exam  rooms were similar in layout and size to exam rooms used  in primary care. the infusion areas we observed served as  treatment areas for all diagnoses requiring infusion, not just  breast cancer. another limitation is that we observed a  small set of patients (n=14) who were enrolled in a larger  study on personal health information management. these  patients were actively involved in discussing personal  health information management during data collection. our  participant observation methodology meant that patients  enrolled in the study knew the topic and interests of the  researchers. it is possible that this knowledge biased their  actions and interview responses.  conclusion  clinic environments are harsh information environments  that often prevent patients from interacting with  information effectively. from patients’ perspectives,  awkward physical positions, bursts of information  exchange, separation from information artifacts, lack of  advance information, and heightened stress inhibit their  capacities to access, use, learn, communicate, and  remember information effectively. the negative impact of  these factors on collaboration and information exchange  with clinicians thwarts efforts to improve quality of care.  physicians rely on patients to focus their attention,  communicate effectively, and recall information accurately.  to maximize patients’ capacities to partner effectively with  clinicians, we need to transform clinic environments into  effective information workspaces for patients.  acknowledgements  we would like to thank all of our patient participants, and  the clinic staff who facilitated our study. thanks to nlm  r01lm009143 for our funding.  references  1. baker, c.f. annoyance to icu noise: a model of  patient discomfort. critical care nursing quarterly, 16,  2 (1993), 83-90.   2. baker, c.f., garvin, b., kennedy c.w., & polivaka, b.  the effect of environmental sound and communication  on ccu patients’ heart rate and blood pressure.  research in nursing & health, 16, 6 (1993), 415-421.   3. ballegaard, s.a., hansen, t.r., & kyng, m. healthcare  in everyday life: designing healthcare services for daily  life. chi 2008. acm press (2008), 1807-1816.  4. berg, m. patients and professionals in the information  society: what might keep us awake in 2013.  international journal of medical informatics, 66, 1-3  (2002), 31-37.   5. broadbent, d.e. perception and communication.  london: pergamon press, 1958.  6. cabrera, i.n., & lee, m.h.m. reducing noise pollution  in the hospital setting by establishing a department of  sound: a survey of recent research on the effects of  noise and music in health care. preventive medicine, 30,  4 (2000), 339-345.  7. consolvo, s. & towle, j. evaluating an ambient display  for the home. chi 2005, acm press (2005), 1304-1307.   8. ehlen, p., purver, m., niekrasz, j., lee, k., & peters, s.  meeting adjourned: off-line learning interfaces for  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 191


    automated meeting understanding. iui 2008, acm  press (2008), 276-284.   9. frankel, r., altschuler, a., george, s., kinsman, j.,  jimison, h., robertson, n.r., & hsu, j. effects of  exam-room computing on clinician-patient  communication: a longitudinal qualitative study.  journal of general internal medicine, 20, 8 (2005),  677-682.  10. frost, j. & smith, b. 2002. visualizing health practice  to treat diabetes. chi 2002, acm press (2002), 606- 607.   11. hafner d. lost in the fog: understanding "chemo  brain". nursing, 39, 8 (2009), 42-45.   12. hayes, g.r., abowd, g.d., davis, j.s., blount, m.l.,  ebling, m., & mynatt, e.d. opportunities for pervasive  computing in chronic cancer care. proc. pervasive  computing 2008, 262-279.   13. henrich,, a., fay, j., & sorrells, a.k.. effects of acuity- adaptable rooms on flow of patients and delivery of  care. american journal of critical care, 13, 1 (2004),  35-45.  14. hignett, s. physical ergonomics in health care. in  carayon, p. (ed). handbook of human factors and  ergonomics in health care and patient safety. lawrence  earlbaum, mahwah, new jersey, usa, 2007, 309-321  15. jackson, l. information complexity and medical  communication: the effects of technical language and  amount of information in a medical message. health  comm 4, 3 (1992), 197-210.   16. ju, w., ionescu, a., neeley, l., & winograd, t. where  the wild things work: capturing shared physical  design workspaces. cscw 2004, acm press (2004),  533-541.  17. ley, p., & llewelyn, s. improving patients'  understanding, recall, satisfaction, and compliance. in  broome, a., & llewelyn, s. (eds.) health psychology:  processes and applications. chapman and hal, london,  75–98.   18. ley, p., & spellman, m.s. communications in an  outpatient setting. british journal soc clin psych, 4  (1965), 114-116.  19. mamykina, l., mynatt, e., davidson, p., & greenblatt,  d. mahi: investigation of social scaffolding for  reflective thinking in diabetes management. chi 2008,  acm press (2008), 477-486.   20. moen, a., & brennan, p.f. health@home: the work of  health information management in the household  (himh): implications for consumer health informatics  (chi) innovations. jamia, 12, 6 (2005), 648-656.  21. morris, m.r., paepcke, a., winograd, t., &  stamberger, j. teamtag: exploring centralized versus  replicated controls for co-located tabletop  groupware. chi 2006, acm press (2006), 1273-1282.  22. page, a. keeping patients safe: transforming the work  environment of nurses. 2004, institute of medicine of  the national academies press, washington, d.c., usa.  23. pitkethly, m., macgillivray, s., & ryan, r. recordings  or summaries of consultations for people with cancer  cochrane database of systematic reviews 2007, issue  1. art. no.: cd001539.  24. rice, g., ingram, j., & mizan, j. enhancing a primary  care environment: a case study of effects on patient and  staff in a single general practice. british journal of  general practice,58, 552 (2008), 465-470.  25. rouf, e., whittle, j., lu, n. & schwartz, m.d.  computers in the exam room: differences in physician- patient interaction may be due to physician experience.  journal of general internal medicine, 22, 1(2007), 43- 48.  26. schappert, s.m.,& rechtsteiner ,e.a. ambulatory  medical care utilization estimates for 2006. national  health statistics reports, 6, 8 (2008), 1-29.  27. scott, s.d., sheelagh, m., carpendale, t., & inkpen, k.  m. territoriality in collaborative tabletop workspaces.  cscw 2004, acm press (2004), 294-303.  28. schmidt, k., & bannon, l. taking cscw seriously:  supporting articulation work. computer supported  cooperative work, 1, 1, (1992), 7-40.  29. shumaker sa, reizenstein je. environmental factors  affecting inpatient stress in acute care hospitals. in:  evans, g.w. (ed) environmental stress, 1982.  cambridge university press, new york, usa, 179-223.  30. star, s.l., & strauss, a. layers of silence, arenas of  voice:  the ecology of visible and invisible work.  cscw, 8, 1-2 (1999), 9-30.  31. sullivan, f., & wyatt, j.c. how computers can help to  share understanding with patients. british medical  journal, 331, 7521 (2005), 892-894.  32. ulrich, r.s. view through a window may influence  recovery from surgery. science, 224, 4647 (1984), 420- 421.  33. wang, h. & blevis, e. concepts that support collocated  collaborative work inspired by the specific context of  industrial designers. proc. of cscw. acm press (2004),  546-549.  34. williams, j. r., guidelines for the use of multimedia in  instruction, proceedings of the human factors and  ergonomics society 42nd annual meeting, (1998),  1447-1451.  35. wilson, a,d. playanywhere: a compact interactive  tabletop projection-vision system. uist 2005, acm  press (2005), 83-92.   chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 192
