

blowing in the wind: unanchored patient  information work during cancer care  predrag klasnja1, andrea civan hartzler2, kent t. unruh2, & wanda pratt1,2  1 information school & dub group university of washington  seattle, wa 98195, usa  [klasnja, wpratt]@uw.edu  2 biomedical and health informatics  university of washington  seattle, wa 98195, usa  [andreah, ktunruh]@uw.edu    abstract  patients do considerable information work. technologies  that help patients manage health information so they can  play active roles in their health-care, such as personal health  records, provide patients with effective support for focused  and sustained personal health tasks. yet, little attention has  been paid to patients’ needs for information management  support while on the go and away from their personal health  information collections. through a qualitative field study,  we investigated the information work that breast cancer  patients do in such ‘unanchored settings’. we report on the  types of unanchored information work that patients do over  the course of cancer treatment, reasons this work is  challenging, and strategies used by patients to overcome  those challenges. our description of unanchored patient  information work expands our understanding of patients’  information practices and points to valuable design  directions for supporting critical but unmet needs.  author keywords  personal health informatics, user study, mobile computing.  acm classification keywords  h.5.2 user interfaces; j.3 life and medical sciences:  medical information systems.  general terms  design, human factors.  introduction  cancer care requires a great deal of information work on  the part of the patient [19]. beyond the psychological stress  of dealing with a life-threatening illness, patients must  manage a range of personal health information to play an  active role in their health-care [16]. for example, patients  often gather and integrate their medical records, web pages,  notes, and articles to make treatment decisions. they then  must coordinate with various institutions and clinicians  where they receive care (e.g., surgeons, oncologists, nurses,  and other hospital personnel). in addition, to cover  treatment costs and secure sufficient time off from work for  cancer care, patients often exchange health information  with their insurance companies, managers at work, and  benefits departments. all the while, patients monitor their  health as they move through treatment and share this  information with their clinicians, family, and friends.   clearly, to play active roles in their health-care, patients  must practice effective information management. yet,  patients perform this information work under various  conditions of support. some information management is  anchored with sustained time, dedicated space, and focused  attention. for example, patients can spend considerable  time on their home computers researching cancer treatment  options and comparing their effectiveness. however, a  range of important care-related needs arise while patients  are away from such support. in these ‘unanchored’ settings,  patients often lack the informational, physical, and  attentional resources needed to effectively engage in  required information activities.   when we examine the times when patients face difficulties  managing health information, we find that often the need  for patient work arises while the patient is away from her  home, computer, or personal health information collection.  for example, while walking through the grocery store, a  patient might remember that she needs to ask her physician  about a supplement she is considering for chemotherapy  side effects. she needs to write this question down before  she forgets it, and then add it to the collection of  information she is preparing for her next appointment. in  other cases, the patient might anticipate an information  activity but may not have attentional resources to engage in  it effectively.  for example, it can be challenging for a  patient to understand and write down what the oncologist is  explaining when the patient is foggy-headed from  chemotherapy drugs and the oncologist is speaking rapidly  using unfamiliar technical vocabulary.   we use the term ‘unanchored work’ to refer to the full  range of such information activities that the patient must do    permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  chi 2010, april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, georgia, usa.  copyright 2010 acm  978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00.  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 193


  without access to sufficient supporting resources. in this  paper, we describe how patients undergoing treatment for  breast cancer engage in critical, but poorly understood and  ill-supported, unanchored information work. based on  repeated in-depth interviews and observations with 15  breast cancer patients, we describe the types of unanchored  work that patients do, the causes that lead to the unanchored  nature of these information activities, and the workarounds  that patients develop to manage unanchored information  work. finally, we outline design directions for technologies  that could help to anchor many of these critical activities  and greatly ease the difficult work of being a patient.  related work  as health-care moves increasingly to outpatient settings,  individuals must coordinate their care among multiple  clinicians and act as main custodians of their health  information. to do so, patients manage a broad range of  personal health information that comes in different forms  and is fragmented across locations and devices, making its  effective management challenging. to support these  information activities, pratt et al [16] have called for a user- centered approach to studying individuals’ personal health  information management (phim) practices. prior research  on phim finds that health information management often  takes place in shared areas of the home and that individuals  maintain specific files and workspaces (e.g., stacks on the  kitchen counter or the desk in the study) to manage their  health information [14]. moen & brennan outline common  strategies for managing health information in the home,  distinguished by information visibility and importance. the  main type of technological support for phim activities has  been the personal health record (phrs). these tools,  usually web-based, enable patients to have a single location  for their medical history, lab results, medications, and  immunizations, and often connect to hospital records [10].  while research on phrs and home-based information  management strategies have yielded valuable insights,  patients’ health information needs when they are away from  their computers and home health collections remain largely  unstudied. one exception is work on mobile technologies  for chronic disease management to enable mobile collection  of health-related information (e.g., blood glucose readings,  images of food) [6,13]. however, the focus of this work has  been on fostering reflection when the user is back at home  and in front of her computer, rather than supporting needs  that arise under unanchored conditions. the work described  in this paper tries to fill this knowledge gap.  with regards to information practices in cancer, prior work  has mostly focused on how patients seek information about  their illness [9,11]. recent work shows that these  information seeking activities are increasingly moving  online, especially among younger patients [18]. our paper  extends this literature by examining other types of  information needs inherent in day-to-day work of cancer  care management.   methodologically, there has been a growing realization that  the design of effective personal health technologies requires  a deep understanding of what individuals do in their role as  patients and how their health activities relate to other  aspects of their lives. for example, ballegaard et al [1]  argue that healthcare systems are traditionally designed  from a “clinical perspective,” which focuses solely on what  the technology needs to do to improve the patient’s health.  with this they contrast their “citizen’s perspective,” which  pays close attention to the personal goals of patients and  how technology fits within the context of their daily lives.  similarly, unruh & pratt [19] suggest that the work patients  do during care remains largely invisible. they argue that  study of patient work is necessary to increase patient  participation, reduce medical errors, improve information  provisioning, and design effective health technologies.   although the emphasis on the clinical perspective is still  dominant, there are notable exceptions. in hci, work on  elder care [3,15] has employed in-depth user studies to  ground technology design in a deep understanding of  elders’ daily lives, their caretaking networks, and the needs  of both. similarly, hayes et al [8] used extensive qualitative  work with patients and clinicians to provide an overview of  the cancer treatment process and develop design ideas on  how pervasive technology can support patients at different  stages of care. our work extends this important research  and follows a similar approach to provide a more detailed  description of cancer patients’ information management  needs during one specific stage: active treatment.   finally, although not specific to health, several studies  address mobile capture and use of notes in everyday life  [2,4,12]. this work finds that individuals create a large  number of ’information scraps‘ [2] that have a number of  functions, including temporary storage, cognitive support,  archiving, and reminding. these studies conclude that  electronic support for mobile note-taking is promising and  that it should focus on enabling lightweight capture as well  as flexible representation and organization of content.  it is not known how much of what has been found in the  studies of mobile note-taking in everyday life carries over  to the health domain. although the importance of such  factors as lightweight capture and flexible organization are  likely to hold true, the health setting could introduce  additional constraints not found in prior work of other  settings. in our work, we take a user-centered approach to  explore this issue by providing a descriptive account of  patients’ unanchored information work. filling this gap in  our understanding of patient work will help to ground the  design of supportive technologies that can further help  patients play an active role in their health-care.  methods  our findings are a part of a larger study of the breadth of  information management work of breast cancer patients. in  a six-week field study, we conducted interviews and  observations with fifteen breast cancer patients during their  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 194


cancer treatment. in this section, we describe how this  fieldwork was conducted, who our participants are, and  how we analyzed the data for this paper.   study procedures  from november 2007 through august 2008, we conducted  semi-structured interviews and observations with fifteen  breast cancer patients. each participant was asked to take  part in two home visits, two telephone interviews, and a  clinic observation, roughly evenly spaced over a six week  period. two participants became too busy with their cancer  experience to complete the second home interview.   home visits  we conducted 90-minute interviews and artifact walk- throughs in participants’ homes about how they managed  their health information. during the visits, participants  showed us their personal health information collections and  the tools they used to manage this information. we also  used the critical incident technique [5] to get specific  information about a salient recent information management  task. we audio recorded and transcribed all interviews and  photographed the information management artifacts.  phone interviews  during 30-minute phone interviews, we followed up on  issues participants raised during the previous interview and  asked them about the information they were managing for  upcoming events. as in the home interviews, we also asked  about a specific recent information management activity  and how exactly the participants handled it. we audio- recorded and transcribed all phone interviews.  clinic observations  we accompanied each participant to one clinic appointment  of her choosing. during the appointment, we directly  observed the participant using information and information  tools to interact with clinicians. we took field notes and  audio recorded and transcribed discussions that took place  during the clinic observations.   participants  we recruited a convenience sample of 15 patients who were  undergoing treatment for breast cancer. participants were  recruited with flyers through local cancer treatment centers  and cancer support organizations. all participants were  women. they ranged in age from 37 to 73 (mean 50,  median 51) and were highly diverse in socioeconomic  status, level of education, experience with technology, and  extent of their support networks. for example, one  participant described herself as homeless while another was  a retired biomedical researcher with advanced degrees.  other occupations included a grocery checker, a nurse, an  acupuncturist, a retired military information specialist, a  stay at home mom, a wealth advisor, a consultant, an  auditor, an airline professional, and a poet.  participants’ education ranged from some high school (1  participant) to post graduate (4 participants). one  participant had a vocational degree, two had some college,  and seven were college graduates. one participant  identified herself as hispanic, one as native american, and  the rest as caucasian. eleven participants had breast cancer  for the first time and four were experiencing it for the  second time. participants received different treatments  during the field study, some more than one type. eleven  participants were undergoing chemotherapy, 7 underwent  surgery, 3 were undergoing radiation therapy, and 1 was  undergoing hormone therapy.  analysis  in our analysis, we focused on participants’ unanchored  information management work. we created a case report  for each participant made up of interview transcripts, field  notes, and photographs. the authors worked together to  analyze interview transcripts through open coding and  iteratively identified emergent themes [17]. table 1 shows  the codes that make up the coding scheme that evolved  from our analysis. once the coding scheme was finally  formalized, we used it to recode the interview transcripts.  code  definition  critical  information  capture  tracking and recording personal health  information when a need arises, often while  engaged in unrelated activities away from  one’s health information collection  critical  information  retrieval  looking up and referencing critical  information when the need arises, often while  engaged in unrelated activities and away from  one’s health information collection   life situation contextual factors in a patient’s life that  shape unanchored nature of her work  anchoring  through  environment  shaping the environment to ground  unanchored work (e.g., post-its hung on the  wall as reminders)  repurpose use of time, tools, or spaces intended for one  purpose of unrelated personal, professional,  or health-related work  collaboration receiving help for health information work  from other people  mobile  collection  set of personal health information items taken  from place to place  unanchored  implement  tangible resource used to support unanchored  work  break-down problem  that occurs due to unanchored  nature of work or due to ineffective strategies  for unanchored work   table 1: coding scheme for unanchored patient work  results  in this section, we first outline a range of unanchored  information work that our participants engaged in during  the field study. we then describe the causes of unanchored  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 195


  work that make this form of patient work so challenging.  finally, we describe the strategies that our participants  adopted to overcome these challenges.  unanchored information work: a brief sketch  during the course of their treatment, our participants  engaged in numerous unanchored information activities to  manage their health. these activities do not share one single  trait that readily distinguish them from other forms of  patient information work. rather, unanchored work is a  result of the circumstances under which patients engage in  information activities, such as where the activity takes  place. for example, some information needs arose away  from home (e.g., in the car) while other unanchored  activities took place while the participants were at home but  away from their work areas—in the bathroom or in bed.   unanchored work spanned both information capture and  information retrieval. on the capture side, the following  activities were commonly performed in an unanchored way:  (1) tracking symptoms and side effects, such as wound  drainage and post-surgery pain; (2) collecting information  for upcoming clinic appointments, such as questions for  clinicians; (3) recording clinicians’ explanations and advice  during appointments, and (4) capturing information in  unexpected situations, such as receiving a phone call from  the clinic after a long phone tag.  on the retrieval side, the two most common unanchored  activities related to (1) planning and scheduling treatments,  appointments, and help (e.g., a ride to the clinic), and (2)  retrieving health information at the clinic, such as medical  history as well as the medications taken and their doses.  in what follows, we describe the causes that made these  information tasks challenging and the forms these activities  took during cancer care.   causes of unanchored work  the information activities that cancer patients perform  become unanchored due to four main characteristics of the  cancer care context: (1) diminished attention, (2) lack of  familiarity, (3) necessity for mobility, and (4) inadequate  work environments. we explain these factors below, and  describe their effects on patients’ information work.   diminished attention  the need for information capture and retrieval frequently  arose when our participants were not in an optimal state of  mind. in particular, participants in early stages of treatment  experienced a great deal of stress and anxiety that interfered  with their ability to focus. after treatments, participants  also often experienced side effects (e.g., pain, fatigue,  nausea, “chemo brain”) that affected them both physically  and mentally. diminished attention due to stress, anxiety,  and the effects of treatment reduced the ability of  participants to concentrate, and to capture and process  information effectively.   recalling and recording information in clinical  appointments was one significant area where diminished  attention was a major problem. p8 describes one such  appointment: “we had gone over a few questions i had had  and it was hard for me to kind of remember what i had  wanted to ask…. i was not in a good state of mind to  remember all that.” replying to physicians’ questions could  be equally difficult. p4 explains: “…with the particular  drugs i have, it seems to really interfere with my being able  to think, particularly if somebody asked me a question and  i'm just sitting there like a deer in the headlights just  because my brain doesn't seem to process that kind of thing  that well.”  diminished attention also made it difficult for participants  to accurately understand and remember the information that  physicians presented during appointments. unless they  immediately captured this information, many of the issues  they discussed were soon forgotten.   outside clinic appointments, the urgency to capture a  question or a thought relevant to cancer care as soon as it  first occurred was intensified by participants’ state of mind.  for example, given the importance of clinic appointments,  most participants prepared in advance by creating lists of  questions to ask and collecting materials such as magazine  or research articles to discuss. capturing this information  was extremely important, but their diminished attention  made it more difficult. as p4 explained: “…if you have  questions, just write them down. to write them down when  you're thinking of them… because for me i'll forget it and i  suspect a lot of people are that way too. you have so much  on your mind and so many decisions to make and you could  be feeling really crappy. {p4}  thus, their diminished attention made it vital for  participants to be prepared for information capture at any  time because they could not count on being able to  remember what they needed to write down once they were  back at home.  lack of familiarity  eleven participants were first time cancer patients. for this  group, the newness of the cancer experience added  challenges to their information work. for example, during  consultations and other clinical visits, participants were  often required to provide a wide variety of personal health  information. examples included: (1) medications they were  taking and their doses; (2) medical history, including family  history and history of cancer-related issues  (e.g., when the  cancer was discovered, what tests and consultations the  participants had, what etc.), and (3) sequence and severity  of treatment side effects. lack of familiarity meant  participants were unsure of what would be required from  them, and they sometimes came unprepared to  appointments, having to rely on memory. as they  progressed through treatment and became acquainted with  the operations of the cancer clinic, participants learned what  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 196


information they would need during different types of  appointments.   similarly, those participants who knew little about cancer  often experienced difficulty understanding what clinicians  conveyed during appointments. this situation also made it  challenging to recognize what portions of the conversation  were most important and what they should record in their  notes. as p11 described: “but then the oncologist came in  and holy cow… that’s a foreign world…. it was all  completely new and i don’t have a science background and  so i was just like oh, what is she saying?”   this problem sometimes led to misunderstandings that  impacted the participant’s ability to make treatment  decisions. in one case a participant decided not to pursue  care at an excellent regional cancer center after she  misunderstand her doctor as saying that receiving treatment  there would require her to enroll in a clinical trial.   necessity for mobility  the need to record and retrieve information often occurred  when participants were away from home or their primary  health information collection. participants thought of  questions for their doctors and remembered other issues  when they were out and about, in their cars, or at work. for  example, p13 carpooled with her sister to work every day,  and during this time they often talked about p13’s  treatment. many of p13’s thoughts and questions about her  care were generated during these discussions. being able to  record such questions and thoughts as they occurred was  extremely important to all of our participants.  similarly, participants routinely played long phone tag with  clinic staff. to finally connect, participants needed to take  phone calls at inconvenient times, for example, while  running errands or in the car. during these calls participants  had to schedule appointments and answer questions about  procedures or cancer care history. all this required ready  access to their calendars and at least some health  information. thus, they needed to carry this information  with them to ensure these interactions were effective.   for a third of our participants, the need for mobile  information management was even greater due to their  living situation. two participants traveled long distances for  treatment and spent several hours a day in their cars. for  them, their car became their primary working space. three  other participants lived part time with friends or relatives  while receiving treatment and their health information  collection was generally split among different homes.   finally, analogous information issues arose even when  participants were in their homes, but separated from the  dedicated spaces where information work was typically  anchored. for example, participants sometimes woke up in  the middle of the night with a question or a thought they  wanted to write down before they fell back asleep and  forgot it. similarly, after surgery participants needed to  keep a ‘drain log’ to track fluid that drained from their  wounds. participants usually emptied their drains in the  privacy of their bathrooms, away from their primary  collection of health information. needing to track drain  information meant that participants either had to record it in  the bathroom or they had to wait until they were back at  their desks to record this information. for many, capturing  information in the bathroom was the easier option. as p8  explains: “this is when i got home from the hospital i had  those drains and would have to empty the fluid that would  come out of them. and we had to keep track of it as far as  you know, how much came out, what color it was. you  know, just to kind of keep track of how things went… and it  just, i kept it [the drain log] up in the bathroom with  everything else because that’s where i changed and i didn’t  want to go up there, remember and then come down here.”  much like information needs outside the home, such  situations involved information work while participants  were away from their information collections and  workspaces where they usually managed their health  information. the demands that such unanchored situations  created were thus very similar to those when patients were  mobile and away from home.  inadequate work environments  information work was often made more difficult due to  inadequate environments in which participants were  expected to understand important health information. as  noted above, critical information encounters happened  during clinical appointments. yet, those interactions often  happened while participants were sitting on an exam table  without access to a writing surface and far away from the  personal items they brought to take notes. this kind of  environment made it harder both to focus on what the  clinician was conveying and to record that information. one  participant even reported not taking any notes during an  appointment because her notepad was in her purse in the  corner of the room, and she did not want to interrupt her  clinician to get off the exam table to retrieve it. unruh et al  [20] provide more details about challenges of exam rooms  as patient workspaces.  similarly, for participants who traveled long distances for  treatment, their car became their primary work  environment. p10, for example, drove three hours to get to  the clinic. she made and received phone calls to arrange  care, took notes, and completed forms all while in her car.  if a phone call came in, she would pull over, deal with the  situation, and then get back on the road. for her, this way of  managing her care was the norm, not an exception.  finally, a number of our participants lacked technical  resources such as fast internet connections, computers, or  printers needed for effective information work. this made  researching their health condition and available treatments  more difficult, requiring them to do this work at libraries,  homes of friends and relatives, at work, or over the phone,  and to integrate the information they found with their other  personal health information at a later time.   chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 197


  strategies and workarounds  to do their health information work under such unanchored  conditions, our participants developed a number of  strategies and workarounds. we describe these next.  mobile information collections  to make it easier to capture and retrieve information when  away from home, when a need arose at an unexpected time,  and when they were not feeling well, our participants tried  to make their information and information tools mobile.  three types of mobile information collections were  particularly common:  appointment bundles. all our participants created special  information collections that they took to clinical  appointments. following gorman [7], we have termed these  task-specific information collections appointment bundles.  the content of appointment bundles varied by the type of  appointment. for consultations with clinicians, for instance,  bundles typically included lists of questions, copies of  magazine or research articles to discuss, bottles of currently  taken medications, and labs or test results relevant to the  visit. in contrast, for chemotherapy several participants  brought items such as books, crossword puzzles, or portable  dvd players for passing time. one participant even  brought her taxes to work on during the infusion (figure 1).    figure 1: p2’s chemotherapy appointment bundle inluded a  question list, puzzle books, her taxes, and her cancer folder.  appointment bundles were generally constructed over time  as participants added to them when they thought of new  questions or issues. for example, p8 started with a “patient  itinerary,” a clinic-provided schedule of the visit, and then  added to it questions that she and her husband thought of  over several weeks. when he thought of something, the  husband would email the questions from his blackberry and  p8 would add it to her list. often, such questions were later  triaged and revised shortly before the appointment to make  sure the question list was current and contained all the  important issues the patient wanted to raise. this was  typically done a day or two before the appointment and  participants often went through their bundles  collaboratively with family members. appointment bundles  helped ensure that participants remembered to ask all their  questions, discuss their concerns, and had all the relevant  information with them to make the clinical visit as effective  as possible.   mobile reference collection. in addition to appointment  bundles, nearly all participants also carried a more general  mobile collection of important information. for example,  several participants carried a list of the medications they  took, since they were “asked that all the time” {p8}. as  p12 told us, “always keep a list of all your meds… you  might remember the name of the drug but you might not  remember individual dosages.” mobile reference  collections took different forms, from pocket calendars  stuffed with business cards and loose paper to blackberries  (figure 2). these collections allowed participants to  schedule appointments and coordinate care whenever and  wherever the need arose. as we explain in the discussion,  mobile reference collections are very similar to the just-in- time strategy identified by [14] in home-based phim.    figure 2: p3’s mobile reference collection included her  calendar, business cards, and notes.  carrying everything. finally, some participants dealt with  not knowing what information they needed and having to  spend a large amount of time in transit by carrying entire or  large portions of their collection of cancer-related  information with them. several participants who were in the  early stages of treatment described carrying their whole  collection of cancer–related information (e.g., their “cancer  bag” {p15}) with them. this strategy was also common for  participants who had to travel or split their time between  several residences.    capture, then triage  another common strategy, alluded to earlier, was capturing  information whenever the need arose, and then leaving  sorting, triaging, and deciding what exactly to do with the  information for later when the patient could devote time  and resources to information management. our participants  kept note-taking implements in locations where they  thought they would need to capture information quickly. at  home, notepads were kept in the bathroom, next to the  phone, and beside the bed (figure 3). participants also  carried post-it notes, notebooks, and pieces of loose paper  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 198


in their purses so they could be sure to write things down  while away from home. finally, if a need to capture  information arose in a situation in which they did not have  any of their standard note-taking tools, participants used  any scrap paper they could find. these included envelopes,  backs of unrelated business cards, post-it notes, and  margins of documents unrelated to cancer.  the information quickly captured in this way was later  triaged and sorted, transferred to question lists, and added  to special purpose collections, such as appointment bundles,  when participants had sufficient time, attention, and access  to their personal health information collection. the triage  process was often triggered by an upcoming appointment,  the need to pay bills, or some other similar acute event.  asking others for help  getting help from others was another common way our  participants dealt with the need to do information work  while their attention was diminished or they lacked  necessary resources. for example, nearly all our  participants had taken another person to a clinic  appointment. this strategy helped ensure that their  questions were addressed even if they did not feel well. it  also helped to simply have another set of ears in the room.  finally, those appointment companions often took notes,  freeing the participant to focus on the conversation with her  clinician. several participants believed that bringing  another person to appointments was absolutely crucial.  formulating questions and issues to raise in appointments  was also often done in collaboration with others. p13  thought of questions while commuting with her sister and  talking to a colleague at work who was a nurse. p8 and her  husband emailed questions to one another whenever one of  them would think of one. further, p11 explicitly sought  advice from other people on important questions to ask: “i  talk to other people to find out what questions they would  ask.  my sister asked a nurse practitioner if she knew what  she would ask related to…what does it mean that this tumor  is disappearing and so this woman had some questions  related to that that i wouldn't have thought of asking.”    figure 3: p4 left a notepad in the bathroom because questions  for the doctor often came to her there.  finally, participants who did not have the resources to do  the information gathering due to old computers, slow  internet connections, not owning a printer, or simply feeling  ill, sometimes asked others to help them by doing research,  or letting them use their computers to gather information.  repurposing resources for health  our participants dealt with the challenges of unanchored  work by repurposing resources from other domains of their  lives for personal health information management. doing  research about cancer treatments from work is one example  of this strategy. however, repurposing extended to various  artifacts as well. p11, for example, wrote poetry and always  carried her poetry notebook, which she referred to as “my  baby.” during cancer treatment, this notebook became a  mixed-use artifact, containing not only poetry but notes  related to cancer as well. she used the notebook, for  example, to make and annotate a list of people who might  be able to help her get to and from the hospital while she  was living away from home for treatment. similarly, p4  began making notes about cancer in the same notebook  where she wrote recipes and practiced watercolor. p12  added the numbers for nurses and clinics to speed dial on  her mobile phone, so they would always be handy even if  she could not find the business cards or did not have the  energy to look for them. in these cases, our participants  appropriated information tools they were already actively  using and always had with them in order to make  unanchored capture and retrieval of personal health  information easier and quicker.   using environment for anchoring  lastly, our participants commonly anchored their work by  placing post-its, notes and other artifacts in their  environment to act as reminders and for awareness [c.f. 12].  as in prior work, our participants used the environment for  anchoring by keeping appointment dates on post-its stuck to  the bathroom mirror, leaving medication bottles out to  remind them to fill prescriptions, and keeping calendars out  in the open for easy access both by the participant and other  household members. this strategy made it easier to quickly  find information when a phone call came in and remember  important tasks and events when participants felt ill.  however, the unanchored context in which our participants  did much of their information work meant that this strategy  was also used beyond the home. sticky notes were also kept  in the car, and on artifacts that participants carried with  them, such as their purses and mobile information  collections. participants who split their time between  residences, or even between work and home, often  maintained multiple calendars, one for each location. the  ease of access and awareness that such calendars provided  made it worthwhile to try to keep all of them up to date.  interestingly, this strategy extended to emotional support as  well. get-well cards were routinely kept out to remind  participants that they were cared for, and some participants  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 199


  even carried such cards or printouts of supportive emails  with them to chemotherapy.  breakdowns  while the strategies that our participants employed enabled  them to deal with the conditions of unanchored work, they  did not always work. breakdowns occurred for all strategies  that we have discussed. here we summarize the types of  breakdowns we observed.  even though our participants carried different types of  mobile information collections with them, they did not  always have all the information they needed. for example,  p13 discussed how she needed to make treatment-related  phone calls from work, but could not since the contact  information she needed was in her cancer binder at home.  p15 describes getting “yelled at” by a clinician for not  bringing all her medication bottles to her appointment. in  spite of preparation, not all needs could be anticipated.   capture and triage can fail as well. our participants  sometimes took notes that they later failed to find or  interpret. this was often due to jotting down a note on an  unrelated item (e.g., on a business card for a chiropractor)  or cramming too much into a small space (e.g., in margins  of a date in a pocket calendar). furthermore, the triage  process sometimes just did not happen after information  was successfully captured.  even bringing another person to an appointment can fail.  p11 describes bringing her sister to an appointment and  then having an argument with her later about a point they  understood differently. in the absence of a recording or a  third person, it can be difficult in such situations to  determine who heard the information correctly. finally,  notes get misread or forgotten even if they are in plain  view. p4 describes, for example, thinking that a meeting  was on a different day even though the right date was  clearly written on a note posted on her bathroom mirror.  diminished attention can make it difficult to process even  information designed specifically for that purpose.  discussion  our analysis of unanchored work extends prior research on  phim and mobile information management and points to  design directions for technologies aimed at facilitating  patients’ personal health information work. we discuss  these contributions of our work below.  characterizing unanchored information management  our description of patients’ unanchored work contributes to  our growing understanding of patients’ needs. our findings  extend phim research by broadening the scope of  investigation to incorporate a class of vital yet previously  understudied activities that individuals do as part of  personal health management while away from home. at the  same time, we show that mobility is just one of multiple  conditions that can make information work ‘unanchored’  for patients. other factors, including diminished attention,  unanticipated needs, and inadequate work environments  lead to similar problems and practices. we thus  conceptualize the whole class of such information practices  as unanchored patient information work.   our findings also shed additional light on the strategies  identified in the research on health information  management in the home [14]. we found that during cancer  care, the just-in-time information management strategy can  be heavily influenced by information needs that arise at  unexpected times and places. moreover, our work shows  that in complex health situations, such as cancer, the just- in-time strategy appears to be employed with a significantly  broader range of information than is observed in the general  patient population. the mobile reference collections our  participants carried contained far more than insurance cards  and emergency information, such as allergies. these  collections included business cards (often a host of them),  medication lists, pathology reports, as well as scheduling  information. in addition, special purpose collections, such  as appointment bundles, can be viewed as a form of just-in- time collections as well, albeit ones that need to be right  there and quickly accessible just in specific situations.  the uncertainty surrounding what information will be  needed also meant that our participants routinely applied  the just-in-case strategy as well. with many participants  this strategy manifested in the form of a “cancer bag”  {p15}—a bag with a larger set of cancer-related  information which they also carried to some clinical  appointments. for the participants who traveled for  treatment or had split living arrangements, however, the  strategy could also manifest in keeping their entire personal  health information collection in the car.  our research also confirms the importance of lightweight  capture identified in the work on mobile note-taking in  everyday life [2,12], as well as the importance of flexibility  of information organization afforded by electronic note- taking systems [4,12]. however, as we discuss below, our  findings show that note-taking and other quick capture in  the context of health-care requires more functionality— primarily functionality around integration with health  information—than general purpose mobile note-taking tools  currently offer. these criteria suggest that supporting  unanchored patient work will probably require at least some  dedicated applications (privacy considerations related to  having health information on a mobile device point in the  same direction). it is quite possible, on the other hand, that  some of the same features needed to support unanchored  work of patients could prove useful in other domains as  well. for example, smooth integration of information across  different information collections and flexible conversion of  data into different types on the fly seem like they could be  useful in many different situations.  designing for unanchored information work  as we have seen, although our participants developed a  number of strategies for dealing with the problems of  chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 200


unanchored information work, those strategies often proved  insufficient. notes get misplaced, what a doctor says is  misremembered, and not all information is there when the  patient needs it. the breakdowns in these potentially critical  activities suggest that there is a need for supporting   patients’ information work in unanchored settings.  existing technologies for personal health information  management focus almost exclusively on anchored  information work—the work that individuals do while  sitting at their desks and in front of their computers.  personal health records (phrs) are the most prominent  example of such technologies. phrs allow individuals to  keep all of their health information in one place,  automatically import data about procedures, tests, and lab  results, and, if the phr is controlled by the patient, to keep  ownership of the health record even if they change  providers or move across the country [10]. yet, phrs and  other common health information technologies (e.g., web  sites like webmd or applications for tracking fitness) do  little to help with the kinds of unanchored work that our  participants needed to do.  our findings suggest six design elements for effective  support for unanchored patient information work. first,  tools for unanchored patient work should support easy  capture of a range of more informal information than what  health information has traditionally been taken to mean.  participants wrote down questions, notes, and to-dos, kept  track of phone calls, jotted down names of supplements,  and tracked who would take them to chemotherapy or help  them with household chores. the highly structured data  model of traditional phrs is poorly suited for such  information. applications that support unanchored patient  work should enable quick capture of free text notes, lists,  images, and to-dos—information types that better match  what patients do every day as they manage their care.  however, when participants needed quick access to this  data, it was often alongside more traditional, structured  health information. during an appointment, for example, a  patient might need to access both her questions and notes,  and her medication list and test results. moreover, some of  the questions and notes were explicitly about medications,  test results, and other traditional health information. this  suggests, second, that support for unanchored work requires  smooth integration between informal data, such as  questions, and notes and traditional health information.  mobile access to a phr is not enough; but neither is a  simple notes application on a mobile phone. unanchored  patient work requires that various types of data can be  related to one another, and that these relationships can be  both formulated at the time of capture and used as a means  of retrieval. what this means is that mobile health  applications should support creation of explicit links  between various bits of information, and that linking should  span the full range of information types, from formal health  information to pictures and to-dos.  third, our participants’ efforts to create mobile reference  and special purpose collections, such as appointment  bundles, suggest the need for the ability to flexibly create  subsets of information. the user should be able to act on  these sets of related information as a unit—for example,  bringing up all notes, images, and questions connected to an  appointment just by opening the appointment. since at least  some of the information in these mobile bundles is used  repeatedly (e.g., a medication list can be a part of both an  appointment bundle and a mobile reference collection that  the patient carries all the time), the application should  support linking of information items or collections to  multiple other such items. similarly, since patients often  create similar collections (e.g., appointment bundles), the  application should provide collection templates that can  easily be customized to specific needs.  fourth, since patients often know the purpose for which  information is being captured (e.g., a question for an  upcoming appointment), it would be helpful to enable  information linking and collection creation at the time of  capture. adding a question to an appointment right from  the mobile device, for example, would at least to some  extent reduce the need for the breakdown-prone triage  process. on a mobile device, such linking could be enabled  through either auto-complete lists of the user’s other  information or through free-text tagging that is interpreted  by a server back-end. in either case, the emphasis has to be  on the speed and ease of information entry.  fifth, our participants routinely annotated their information,  turning notes into to-dos, attaching notes to calendar entries  and business cards, and using different symbols to indicate  different stages of progress on a task. making it easy to  change the role of a piece of information would make a  system for unanchored work much more useful. enabling  users to select a piece of text and assign it to a question list  or turn it into a to-do would make it easier for patients to do  process and reflect on their information.  sixth, since unexpected needs arise, a mobile system for  unanchored work should allow searching and on-demand  access of the user’s larger information collection beyond  the mobile bundles the user created. this suggests a need  for an always connected mobile system and some form of  server-based back-end, rather than relying on desktop  applications and local synchronization. even though this is  the general direction in which technology is moving, this  implication—as well as the larger issue that health  information would be located on mobile devices that are  easily misplaced or stolen—introduces important privacy  considerations that should be seriously considered. mobile  devices get lost; a phone is often seen or used by another  person. such circumstances suggest that health applications  should be both separately protected from the general  security model of the device itself, and that their integration  with the more general purpose applications such as the  calendar needs to be carefully thought through.   chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 201


  finally, even though technology promises to greatly ease  unanchored information work of patients, our data suggest  that paper is unlikely to go away in the foreseeable future.  this is not only because much of the information that  patients receive in the course of their treatment is on  paper—business cards, printouts of chemotherapy  appointments, etc.—but also because arguably paper is still  better suited for some contexts in which patients do their  information work. we suspect that drain logs and questions  jotted down in the bathroom are still more likely to be done  on paper, as are notes jotted down in the middle of the  night. however, in many contexts a technical system could  be of great help, and even an incomplete solution could  substantially ease a critical but difficult aspect of the work  that patients have to do to manage their health.  limitations  while we believe that our work yielded valuable findings  about information management practices of cancer patients,  we need to acknowledge its limitations. our sample  included only women and only breast cancer patients. it is  an open question how much of what we observed  generalizes to a larger population of cancer patients or  patients with other health conditions. in addition, although  we tried to get an accurate picture of our participants’  practices, our reliance on interviews makes it possible that  some recall bias has colored our data. future work will,  hopefully, triangulate our findings using different methods.   conclusion  in this paper, we described an aspect of the often invisible  information work that cancer patients do as part of their  care. we make two chief contributions. first, we provide an  account of critical unanchored information activities that  patients do during treatment and that have remained poorly  understood and largely unrecognized by health information  management research. further, we describe causes that  make these activities particularly challenging to patients.  second, we describe a set of guidelines for the design of  systems that could significantly ease these challenging  unanchored information activities. such technology, we  believe, could have a profound impact on patients’ lives,  freeing more of their time and energy to focus on things  that truly matter: their loved ones and getting better.  acknowledgments  we thank our participants for generously giving of their  time and for allowing us to enter their lives at such a  delicate and vulnerable point. we also thank the nih/nlm  #r01lm009143 for supporting this work. finally, a huge  thanks goes to carrie morris for typing parts of the paper  when the first author could not type due to a broken arm.  references  1. ballegaard, s.a., hansen, t.r., & kyng, m. healthcare  in everyday life. in proc. chi ‘08. (2008).  2. berstein, m., van kleek, m., & karger, d. information  scraps: how and why information eludes our personal  information management tools. acm transactions on  information systems, 26, 4, (2008).  3. consolvo, s., roessler, p., shelton, b.e., lamarka, a.,  schilit, b., & bly, s.. technology for care networks of  elders. ieee pervasive computing,3, 2, (2004).   4. dai, l., lutters, w.g., & bower, c. why use memo at  all? restructuring mobile applications to support  informal notetaking. in proc. chi ’05, (2005).  5. flanagan, j.c. the critical incident technique.  psychological bulletin, 51, 4, (1954).  6. frost, j. & smith, b. 2003. visualizing health: imagery  in diabetes education. in proc. dux ‘03, (2003).  7. gorman, p., ash, j., lavelle, m, lyman, j., delcambre,  l., maier, d., weaver, j., & bowers, s. bundles in the  wild. library trends, 49, 2, (2000).   8. hayes, g.r., abowd, g.d., davis, j.s., blount, m.l.,  ebling, m., & mynatt, e.d. opportunities for pervasive  computing in chronic cancer care. in proc. pervasive  computing ‘08, (2008).   9. jenkins, v., fallowfield, l., & saul, j. information  needs of patients with cancer. british journal of cancer,  84, 1, (2001).  10. kim, m.i, & johnson, k.b. personal health records.  journal of american medical informatics association,  9, 2, (2002).  11. leydon, g.m. et al. cancer patients' information needs  and information seeking behaviour. bmj, 320, (2000).  12. lin, m., lutters, w.g., & kim, t.s. understanding the  micronote lifecycle: improving mobile support for  informal notetaking. in proc. chi ’04, (2004).  13. mamykina, l., mynatt, e., davidson, p., & greenblatt,  d. mahi: investigation of social scaffolding for  reflective thinking in diabetes management. in proc.  chi ’08, (2008).   14. moen, a., & brennan, p.f. health@home: the work of  health information management in the household  (himh): implications for consumer health informatics  (chi) innovations. jamia, 12, 6 (2005).  15. mynatt, e.d., rowan, j., jacobs, a., & craighill, s.  digital family portraits: supporting peace of mind for  extended family members. in proc. chi ’01, (2001).  16. pratt, w., unruh, k., civan, a., & skeels, m, personal  health information management. cacm, 49, 1, (2006).  17. strauss, a., & corbin, j. basics of qualitative research.  thousand oaks: sage publications (1998).  18. tian, y., & robinson, j.d. incidental health information  use and media complementarity. patient education and  counseling, 71, 3, (2008).  19. unruh, k.t., & pratt, w. the invisible work of being a  patient and implications for health care. in proc. epic  ’08,  (2008).  20. unruh, k.t., skeels, m., civan hartzler, a. & pratt, w.  transforming clinic environments into information  workspaces for patients. in proc. chi ‘10, (2010).    chi 2010: social support for cancer patients april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 202
