

quantifying the invisible audience in social networks michael s. bernstein1,2, eytan bakshy2, moira burke2, brian karrer2 stanford university hci group1 facebook data science2 computer science department menlo park, ca msb@cs.stanford.edu {ebakshy, mburke, karrerb}@fb.com abstract when you share content in an online social network, who is listening? users have scarce information about who actually sees their content, making their audience seem invisible and difﬁcult to estimate. however, understanding this invisible audience can impact both science and design, since perceived audiences inﬂuence content production and self-presentation online. in this paper, we combine survey and large-scale log data to examine how well users’ perceptions of their audi- ence match their actual audience on facebook. we ﬁnd that social media users consistently underestimate their audience size for their posts, guessing that their audience is just 27% of its true size. qualitative coding of survey responses re- veals folk theories that attempt to reverse-engineer audience size using feedback and friend count, though none of these approaches are particularly accurate. we analyze audience logs for 222,000 facebook users’ posts over the course of one month and ﬁnd that publicly visible signals — friend count, likes, and comments — vary widely and do not strongly in- dicate the audience of a single post. despite the variation, users typically reach 61% of their friends each month. to- gether, our results begin to reveal the invisible undercurrents of audience attention and behavior in online social networks. author keywords social networks; audience; information distribution acm classiﬁcation keywords h.5.3 group and organization interfaces: web-based inter- action general terms design; human factors. introduction posting to a social network site is like speaking to an audi- ence from behind a curtain. the audience remains invisible to the user: while the invitation list is known, the ﬁnal at- tendance is not. feedback such as comments and likes is the only glimpse that users get of their audience. that audience varies from day to day: friends may not log in to the site, permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. to copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. chi 2013, april 27–may 2, 2013, paris, france. copyright 2013 acm 978-1-4503-1899-0/13/04...$15.00. may not see the content, or may not reply. while established media producers can estimate their audience through surveys, television ratings and web analytics, social network sites typi- cally do not share audience information. this design decision has privacy beneﬁts such as plausible deniability, but it also means that users may not accurately estimate their invisible audience when they post content. correct or not, these audience estimates are central to media behavior: perceptions of our audience deeply impact what we say and how we say it. we act in ways that guide the impres- sion our audience develops of us [17], and we manage the boundaries of when to engage with that audience [2]. social media users create a mental model of their imagined audi- ence, then use that model to guide their activities on the site [26, 37]. however, with no way to know if that mental model is accurate, users might speak to a larger or smaller audience than they expect. this paper investigates users’ perceptions of their invisible audience, and the inherent uncertainty in audience size as a limit for users’ estimation abilities. we survey active face- book users and ask them to estimate their audience size, then compare their estimates to their actual audience size using server logs. we examine the folk theories that users have de- veloped to guide these estimates, including approaches that reverse-engineer viewership from friend count and feedback. we then quantify the uncertainty in audience size by inves- tigating actual audience information for 220,000 facebook users. we examine whether there are reasonable heuristics that users could adopt for estimating audience size for a spe- ciﬁc post, for example friend count or feedback, or whether the variance is too high for users to use those signals reliably. we then test the same heuristics for estimating audience size over a one-month period. while previous work has focused on highly visible audience signals such as retweets [5, 31], this work allows us to ex- amine the invisible undercurrents of attention in social media use. by comparing these patterns to users’ perceptions, we can then identify discrepancies between users’ mental mod- els and system behavior. both the patterns and the discrepan- cies are core to social network behavior, but they are not well understood. improving our understanding will allow us to de- sign this medium in a way that encourages participation and supports informed decisions around privacy and publicity. we begin by surveying related work in social media audi- ences, publicity, and predicting information diffusion. we then perform a survey of active facebook users and compare their estimates of audience size to logged data. we then de- session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 21


scribe the inherent unpredictability of audience size on face- book, both for single posts and over the course of a month. related work social media users develop expectations of their audience composition that impact their on-site activity. designing so- cial translucence into audience information thus becomes a core challenge for social media [16, 15]. in response, speak- ers tune their content to their intended audience [12]. on facebook and in blogs, people think that peers and close on- line friends are the core audience for their posts, rather than weaker ties [24, 37]. sharing volume and self-disclosure on facebook are also correlated with audience size [10, 39]. however, as the audience grows, that audience may come from multiple spheres of the user’s life. users adjust their projected identity based on who might be listening [17, 26] or speak to the lowest common denominator so that all groups can enjoy it [20]. social media users are thus quite cognizant of their audience when they author proﬁles [8, 14], and ac- curately convey their personality to audiences through those proﬁles [18]. our notion of the invisible audience is tied to the imagined audience in social media [26]. the imagined audience usu- ally references the types of groups in the audience — whether friends from work, college, or elsewhere are listening. in this paper, we focus not on the composition of the audience but on its size. both elements play important roles in how we adapt our behaviors to the audience. cues can be helpful when estimating aspects of a social net- work, but there are few such cues available today. for exam- ple, to estimate the size of a social network, it can be help- ful to base the estimate on the number of people spoken to recently [21] or to focus on speciﬁc subpopulations and re- lationships such as diabetics or coworkers [27]. however, it can be difﬁcult to estimate how many people within the net- work will actually see or appreciate a piece of content. pub- lic signals such as reshares [31] and unsubscriptions [22] give users feedback about the quality of their content, but users of- ten consume content and make judgments without taking any publicly visible action [3, 13]. in addition, there are consis- tent patterns in online communities that might bias estimates: for example, the prevalence of lurkers who do not provide feedback or contribute [29] and a typical pattern of focusing interactions on a small number of people in the network [4]. questions of audience in social media often reduce to ques- tions of privacy. users must balance an interest in sharing with a need to keep some parts of their life private [2, 30]. however, early studies on social network sites found no rela- tionship between disclosure and privacy concerns [1, 33, 39]. instead, people tended to want others to discover their proﬁles [39], and ﬁlled out the basic information in their proﬁle rel- atively completely [23]. however, young adults are increas- ingly, and proactively, taking an active role in managing their privacy settings [34]. design decisions with respect to audience visibility can inﬂu- ence users’ interactions with their audience [9]. for example, chat circles allows members of a chat room to modify their audience by moving their avatar closer or further from other participants [38]. visualizations can also support socially translucent interactions by making the members of the audi- ence more salient [25, 11] or displaying whether an intended audience member has already seen similar content [7]. black- berry messenger, apple imessage, and facebook messenger all provide indicators that the recipient has opened a message, and online dating sites okcupid and match.com reveal who has viewed your proﬁle. few studies have addressed users’ reactions to this explicit audience indicator [32], though some users of the social networking site friendster expressed con- cerns that they were uncomfortable with this level of social transparency and would consequently not view as many pro- ﬁles [28]. our work pushes the literature forward in important respects: we augment previous research with quantitative metrics, we focus on contexts where the intended audience is friends and not the entire internet, and we empirically demonstrate that audience size is difﬁcult to infer from feedback. we also con- tribute empirical evidence for the wide variance in audience size, something not previously possible for blogs or tweets, because we can track consumption across the entire medium. method and data to study audiences in social media, we use a combination of survey and facebook log data. most facebook content is consumed through the news feed (or feed), a ranked list of friends’ recent posts and actions. when a user shares new content — such as a status update, photo, link, or check-in — facebook distributes it to their friends’ feeds. the feed algo- rithmically ranks content from potentially hundreds of friends based on a number of optimization criteria, including the esti- mated likelihood that the viewer will interact with the content. because of this and differences in friends’ login frequencies, not all friends will see a user’s activity. audience logs we logged audience information for all posts (status updates and link shares) over the span of june 2012 from a random sample of approximately 220,000 us facebook users who share with friends-only privacy. we also logged cumulative audience size over the course of the entire month. to deter- mine audience size, we used client-side instrumentation that logs an event when a feed item remains in the active viewport for at least 900 milliseconds. our measure of audience size thus ensures that the post appeared to the user for a nontrivial length of time, long enough to ﬁlter out quick scrolling and other false positives. however, being in the audience does not guarantee that a user actually attends to a post: accord- ing to eyetracking studies, users remember 69% of posts that they see [13]. so, while there may be some margin of differ- ence between audience size and engaged audience size, we believe that this margin is relatively small. furthermore, we note that univariate correlations are unaffected by linear trans- formations, so the correlations between estimated and actual audience are the same regardless of whether a correction is applied to the data. session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 22


specific post in general 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% actual audience (% friends) pe rc ei ve d  au di en ce  (%  fr ie nd s) 0 50 100 −75%−50%−25% 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% −75%−50%−25% 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% underestimation of audience size (actual % of friends − perceived % of friends) #  us er s figure 1: comparisons of participants’ estimated and actual audience sizes, as percentages of their friend count. most participants underestimated their audience size. the top row displays each estimate vs. its true value; the bottom row displays this data as error magnitudes. left column: the speciﬁc survey, where participants were shown one of their posts, comparing estimated audience to the true audience for that post. right column: the general survey, where participants estimated their audience size “in general,” comparing estimated audience to the number of friends who saw a post from that user during the month. our logging resulted in roughly 150 million distinct (source, viewer) pairs from roughly 30 million distinct viewers. all data was analyzed in aggregate to maintain user privacy. the number of distinct friends providing feedback, given in terms of likes and comments, was also logged for each post. in our analysis, we did robustness checks by subsetting our data, e.g., active vs. less active users, and users with different network sizes. we saw identical patterns each time, so we report the results for our full dataset. survey to compare actual audience to perceived audience, we sur- veyed active facebook users about their perceived audience. participants might estimate their audiences differently when they anchor on a speciﬁc instance than when they consider their general audience, so we prepared two independent sur- veys: general and speciﬁc audience estimation. in the general survey, participants answered the question, “how many peo- ple do you think usually see the content you share on face- book?” in the speciﬁc survey, participants clicked on a page that redirected them to their most recent post, provided that post was at least 48 hours old. speciﬁc survey participants then answered the question, “how many people do you think saw it?” in both surveys, participants then shared how they came up with that number. finally, participants shared their desired audience size on a 5-point scale ranging from “far fewer people” to “far more people”. we advertised the survey to english-speaking users in our random sample who had been on facebook for at least 90 days, had logged into facebook in the past 30 days, and who had shared at least one piece of content (e.g., status update, photo, or link) in the last 90 days. the general audience sur- vey had 542 respondents, and the speciﬁc audience survey had 589. sixty-one percent of respondents were female, with a mean age of 32.8 (sd = 14.7), and a median friend count of 335 (mean = 457, sd = 465). perceived audience size in this section, we investigate how users’ perceptions of their audience map onto reality. this investigation has three main components. first, we quantify how accurate users are at esti- mating the audience size for their posts. second, we perform a content analysis on users’ self-reported folk theories for au- dience estimation. third, we explore users’ satisfaction with their audience size. audience size: perception vs. reality we compared participants’ estimated audience sizes to the ac- tual audience size for their posts. participants underestimated their audiences. figure 1 plots actual audience size against perceived audience size for the two surveys. accurate guesses lie along the diagonal line, where the actual audience is equal session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 23


to the perceived audience. the cluster of points near the x- axis indicates that the majority of participants signiﬁcantly underestimated their audience. for participants considering a speciﬁc post in the past (fig- ure 1, left column), the median perceived audience size was 20 friends (mean = 60, sd = 163); the median actual audience was 78 friends (mean = 99, sd = 84). trans- formed into percentages of network size, the median post reached 24% of a user’s friends (mean = 24%, sd = 10%), but the median participant estimated that it only reached 6% (mean = 17%, sd = 31%). in fact, most participants guessed that no more than ﬁfty friends saw the content, re- gardless of how many people actually saw it. we note that this data is skewed and long-tailed, as is common with many internet phenonema: as such, we rely on medians rather than means as our core summary statistic. we quantify the relative error as 1− perceived audience sizeactual audience size . the median relative error is 0.73, meaning the median esti- mate was just 27% of the actual audience size. in other words, the median participants underestimated their actual audience size by a factor of four. participants in the general survey also underestimated their audiences (figure 1, right column). the median perceived audience size in the general survey was 50 (mean = 137, sd = 236), while the median actual audience (number of friends who saw any post the user produced in the previous month) was 180 (mean = 283, sd = 302). the median relative error was 0.68, indicating that participants underesti- mated their general audience by roughly a factor of three. figure 1 (bottom row) shows the distribution of errors in both surveys. in both cases, participants tended to underestimate their audiences, and there was greater variance in the general version of the survey. not surprisingly, estimates of audience size “in general” were signiﬁcantly larger than those for a speciﬁc post in the past (mean = 137 vs. 60, p < 0.001). as disjoint sets of friends may see different pieces of content, it makes sense that in a month, more people would see a given user’s content than would see any single post she made. survey participants cor- rectly accounted for this. to further quantify this relationship, we can ﬁt a linear model to measure the correlation between estimated and actual au- dience size. the model does not explain much variance at all: r2 = 0.04, p < .001. folk theories of audience what heuristics are guiding users’ estimates, and why are users underestimating so much? to answer these questions, we investigated the theories that participants reported when estimating their audience size. we performed a content anal- ysis on the survey responses for how participants came up with their estimates. the authors inductively coded a subset of the responses to generate categories, then iterated on the coding scheme until arriving at sufﬁcient agreement (fleiss’s kappa = 0.72). theory prevalence guess 23% based on likes and comments 21% portion of total friend count 15% how many friends might log in 9% who they regularly see on the site 5% number of close friends and family 3% who might be interested in the topic 2% based on privacy settings 2% another explanation given 8% table 1: the relative prevalence of folk theories for estimat- ing audience size. participants most often used heuristics based on the amount of feedback they get on their posts or their number of friends. the categories and their relative popularities across both sur- veys appear in table 1. nearly one-quarter of participants said they had no idea and simply guessed. the magnitude of this number indicates how little understanding users have of their audience size. the most popular strategy (other than guessing) was based on feedback: the number of likes and comments on a post. participants explained, “i ﬁgured about half of the people who see it will ‘like’ it, or comment on it,” or “number of people who liked it x4.” others made a rough guess at how many people might log in to facebook: e.g., “i’m guessing one hundred of my frieds [sic] actually read facebook daily” and “not a lot of people stay up late at night.” many respondents based their esti- mates on a ﬁxed fraction of their friend count: “ﬁgure maybe a third of my friends saw it.” others assumed that the peo- ple they typically see in their own feeds or chat with regu- larly are also the audience for their posts: “judging by the number of people that regularly share with me”, “i assume the number of people who see me are the same people that show up on my news feed.” finally, some respondents men- tioned their close friends or family, or friends who would be interested in the topic of the post: “i’m sure a lot of people have blocked me because of all the political memes i’ve been putting up lately,”, “friends that are involved with paintball would catch a glimpse of me mentioning mao.” a small num- ber mentioned their privacy settings: “based on the privacy and sharing rules i have set-up, i would imagine it’s close to that number.” particularly savvy users transferred knowledge from other domains, like “based on the fb page of a business that i’m admin on.” we compared the audience estimation accuracy of each group. despite the variety of theories of audience size, no theory performed better than users who responded “guess”. perceptions of audience size and satisfaction though users have limited insight into their own audience size, their perceptions may play a strong role in their satis- faction with their posts’ reach. in this section, we investigate survey participants’ responses to the question, “how many people do you wish saw this piece of content?” table 2 reports summary statistics for our survey results. only 3% of participants wanted a smaller audience than they session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 24


desired audience count median perceived audience median actual audience far fewer people 6 1% 8% fewer people 9 19% 28% about the same 295 9% 26% more people 145 5% 23% far more people 125 5% 22% table 2: summary statistics for survey participants who de- sired smaller, the same, or larger audiences. perceived and actual audiences shown as a percentage of friend count. thought they had, while slightly less than half (270) wanted a larger audience and another half (295) were satisﬁed with their audience size. the ﬁfteen individuals who wanted smaller audiences had large variance in their responses: those who wanted “far fewer people” had the smallest perceived audience (1%) and those who wanted “fewer people” had the largest perceived audience (19%). given the small number of people who wanted smaller audi- ences, we combined the two groups that desired larger au- diences and ended up with two comparison groups: those who were satisﬁed with their audience size (n=295), and those who wanted a larger audience (n=270). those who desired the same audience size typically estimated that 9% of their friends would see a post (mean = 20%, sd = 32%), while those who wanted “more people” or “far more people” typically estimated 5% of their friends (combined mean = 12%, sd = 28%). a nonparametric wilcoxon rank-sum test comparing these means is signiﬁcant (w = 47179, p < .001), indicating that those who wanted to reach a larger au- dience estimated that their reach was smaller. uncertainty in actual audience size the survey results suggest that people do a poor job of esti- mating the size of the invisible audience in social networks. is this inaccuracy inevitable? is audience size too uncertain to estimate accurately? in this section, we investigate sources of uncertainty when estimating the invisible audience, broadening our view from survey users to our entire dataset of over 220,000 users. we investigate the audience for individual posts in our dataset, then the cumulative audience size for each user over a month. we demonstrate that there is a great deal of variability in au- dience size, and that audience size is difﬁcult to infer using visible signals. these results suggest that audience size can be quite unpredictable and that users simply do not receive enough feedback to predict their audience size well. audience per post each time a facebook user creates a new post, there is a new audience. this section investigates the variance in actual au- dience sizes for individual posts. we consider how well we can predict a new post’s audience using the visible folk theory signals such as fraction of friends and feedback. relationship between friend count and audience size a user’s total friend count is the upper limit on their audience size. is friend count strongly related to audience size? 0 100 200 300 ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 0 200 400 600 800 number of friends n um be r o f f rie nd s  w ho  s aw  p os t 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● 0 200 400 600 800 number of friends pe rc en t o f f rie nd s  w ho  s aw  p os t figure 2: users with the same number of friends have highly variable audience sizes. panels show the distribution of the number of friends (top) and fraction of friends (bottom) who saw a post as a function of friend count. the line and bands indicate the median, interquartile range, and 90% region. across all posts in our sample, the mean and median frac- tion of friends that see a post among users is 34% and 35%, respectively. however, this quantity is highly variable. as figure 2 demonstrates, the interquartile range for the fraction of friends that see a post is approximately 20%, and the 90th percentile range can be as large as 84% (12–96% of the friend count). while the fraction of friends who see a post remains relatively stable, it is important to note that if we consider a user with a ﬁxed number of friends, the actual number of friends who see the post is quite variable. figure 3 illustrates this relationship: the standard deviation in the audience size increases with the number of friends. as a result, post pro- duced by a user with many friends has more variability in the audience size than one produced by a user with few friends. audience size grows most rapidly as a function of number of friends for users with fewer than 200 friends, then tapers off for users with more friends (figure 2, top). likewise, the fraction of friends who see a user’s post is greatest when users have fewer friends (figure 2, bottom). this result might be explained by the fact that users with many friends are likely to session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 25


0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 number of friends who saw post d en si ty friend count 138 266 484 figure 3: the distribution of audience sizes for users at the 25th, 50th and 75th percentile of friend count within our sam- ple, corresponding to 138, 266, and 484 friends. have friends who also have large networks [36]; in a system with limited attention, highly connected users may have less opportunity to see all of their friends’ content. to quantify this uncertainty, we can ﬁt a linear model to pre- dict the fraction of friends viewing a post using the number of friends as input. this model explains relatively little vari- ance (r2 = .12, p < .001). the mean absolute error of the model is .08, meaning that the average actual audience is 8% of friends away from the prediction. informativeness of feedback feedback is the main mechanism that users have to under- stand their audience’s reaction to a post. it was also one of the most popular folk theories in our survey. does feedback actually help users understand their audience size? figure 4 reports the median audience sizes for posts, depend- ing on the amount of feedback they get from friends liking and commenting on the post. audience size grows rapidly as posts gather more feedback, though this growth slows when a post has feedback from ﬁve unique friends. posts with no likes and no comments had an especially large variance in audience size: the median audience was 28.9% of the user’s friends, but the 90% range was from 1.9% to 55.2% of the user’s friends. so, while users may be disappointed in posts that receive no feedback, the lack of feedback says little about the number of people it has reached. like with friend count, we can ﬁt a linear model that uses feedback indicators such as unique commenters and unique likers to predict the fraction of friends that see a post. this model also explains very little variance (r2 = .13, p < .001). like the previous model, its mean absolute error is 8%, so the average prediction is off by 8% from the actual percentage of friends who saw the post. these results are nearly identical to those for the linear predictor based on friend count. joint model neither friend count nor feedback individually are very ac- curate predictors of audience size. however, they may be contributing data that is jointly informative. we ﬁt a linear model using all three predictors from before — friend count, unique commenters, unique likers — to predict the fraction of 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 0 5 10 15 unique friends liking the post pe rc en t o f f rie nd s  w ho  s aw  p os t 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 unique friends commenting on the post pe rc en t o f f rie nd s  w ho  s aw  p os t figure 4: the number of unique friends leaving likes (top) and comments (bottom) is positively associated with audi- ence size, but has large variance. friends in the audience. this model explained around twice as much variance (adj. r2 = .27, p < .001), but this is still not a highly predictive model. the mean absolute error for this model was 7% of the friend network. so, even using all three signals that users can view, it is difﬁ- cult to predict actual audience size. cumulative audience audience size estimates for the general survey were signiﬁ- cantly higher than those speciﬁc to a single post. likewise, users evolve their understanding over extended periods of time. to capture these longer-term processes, we analyzed cumulative audience: the total number of distinct friends who saw or interacted with each user’s content over the span of an entire month. three quarters of the users in our sample pro- duced more than one piece of content during the month, and half the users in our sample produced ﬁve or more pieces of content. relationship with friend count cumulative audiences are much larger than those for a sin- gle post. the median size of a user’s cumulative audience is session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 26


0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% ● ● ● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● 0 200 400 600 800 number of friends c um ul at iv e  au di en ce  (%  o f f rie nd s) figure 5: roughly 60% of users’ friends see at least one item they share each month. cumulative audience size is aggre- gated over all content produced by a user over 28 days. 0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0 100 200 300 400 number of friends who saw at least one post d en si ty friend count 138 266 484 figure 6: the distribution of cumulative audience sizes across all content produced over one month for users at the 25th, 50th and 75th percentile of friend count in our sample (138, 266, and 484 friends). 61% of that user’s friends, compared to 35% for a single post. the relationship between friend count and monthly cumula- tive audience as a fraction of friend count appears in figure 5. again, this relationship can be quite variable: the interquartile range is 31% and the 90% range is 65%. the more friends the user has, the larger the variation (figure 6). informativeness of feedback if users develop a sense of their invisible audience over time by observing the number of friends who provide feedback, how much can they learn about their audience size? fig- ure 7 shows the fraction of friends that consitute a user’s cumulative audience over the span of one month, given a certain number of unique friends who have provided feed- back. for example, approximately 60% of a typical (median) user’s friends will see at least one of their posts in a month, given that exactly two distinct friends commented on their posts. while some minimal amount of feedback is indicative of wider distribution, users who have greater than 10 friends who like their posts, or 5 friends that comment, all have fairly 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% ● ● ● ● ● ●● ●● ●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● 0 10 20 30 40 unique friends liking in a month c um ul at iv e  au di en ce  (%  o f f rie nd s) 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 0 5 10 15 unique friends commenting in a month c um ul at iv e  au di en ce  (%  o f f rie nd s) figure 7: the distribution of the fraction of friends who had seen at least one post by a user as a function of the number of distinct users who had liked (top) or commented on (bottom) at least one piece of the user’s content during a one month period. horizontal axis extends to the 95th percentile of likes and comments for users in our sample. large audiences. furthermore, only a small fraction of users’ audiences provide feedback over the month: 95% of the users in our sample have 40 or fewer friends who like their posts, and 18 friends who comment on their posts. joint model though the cumulative audience is much larger than the audi- ence for single posts, it exhibits no less variance. we trained a linear model to predict audience size, using the same predic- tors as with previous models (friend count, number of unique commenters, number of unique likers) and one new predic- tor: the number of stories the user produced that month. the model explains no more variance than the joint model for in- dividual posts (r2 = .25, p < .001). discussion our analysis indicates that social media users underestimate how many friends they reach by a factor of four. many users session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 27


who want larger audiences already have much larger audi- ences than they think. however, the actual audience cannot be predicted in any straightforward way by the user from vis- ible cues such as likes, comments, or friend count. the core result from this analysis is that there is a fundamen- tal mismatch between the sizes of the perceived audience and the actual audience in social network sites. this mismatch may be impacting users’ behavior, ranging from the type of content they post, how often they post, and their motivations to share content. the mismatch also reﬂects the state of social media as a socially translucent rather than socially transpar- ent system [15, 16]. social media must balance the beneﬁts of complete information with appropriate social cues, privacy and plausible deniability. alternately, it must allow users to do so themselves via practices such as butler lies [19]. the mismatch between estimated and actual audience size highlights an inconsistency: approximately half of our par- ticipants wanted to reach larger audiences, but they already had much larger audiences than they estimated. one inter- pretation would suggest that if these users saw their actual audience size, they would be satisﬁed. or, these users might instead anchor on this new number and still want a larger au- dience. reasons for the audience mismatch why do people underestimate their audience size in social media? one possible explanation is that, in order to re- duce cognitive dissonance, users may lower their estimates for posts that receive few likes or comments. a necessary consequence of users underestimating their audience is that they must be overestimating the probability that each audi- ence member will choose to like or comment on the post. for these posts without feedback, it might be more comfortable to believe that nobody saw it than to believe that many saw it but nobody liked it. our data lend some support for this belief: users estimated smaller audiences when we showed them a speciﬁc recent post than when they considered their posts in general, and we found the same results when we pi- loted a separate survey that focused users on a speciﬁc post they might create in the future. several of the folk theories suggest that users are inﬂuenced by whom they have interacted with recently. so, some un- derestimation may also be due to reliance on the availabil- ity heuristic, which suggests that prominent examples will impact peoples’ estimates [35]. if true, the underestimation might be due to the fact that many social systems have more viewers than contributors [29]. speciﬁcally, users might base their estimates on whom they see on facebook, not account- ing for those who might be reading but not responding. finally, users’ estimates may be affected by the ranking and ﬁltering facebook performs on the news feed. other so- cial network sites have different ﬁlter designs: twitter shows content in an unﬁltered reverse-chronological order, while google+ gives users a slider to choose how much content to ﬁlter from each circle. one might hypothesize that not ﬁltering users’ feeds (e.g., twitter) might increase diversity and thus increase audience size. however, we believe that ﬁl- tering plays a more minor role in audience size: algorithmic feed ﬁlters might prefer content from strong ties, but the many weak ties in social networks have a large collective inﬂuence on users’ feed consumption and sharing practices [6]. limitations our study methodology carries several important limitations. some concerns are associated with the limits of log data. first, techniques for estimating whether a user saw a post have a precision-recall tradeoff: depending on how the in- strument is tuned, it might miss legitimate views or count spurious events as views. however, the instrument would need to be overestimating audience size by a factor of four for our conclusions to be threatened, and we believe that this is unlikely. second, just because a user saw a status update, we cannot be certain that they focused their attention on it or would remember it [13]. our survey attempted to be clear that we were interested in how many people saw the content, but some participants may have blurred the distinction. finally, we focused on one month of data; changes to site features or norm evolution may impact audiences over longer periods. our survey methodology has limitations as well. to vali- date the instrument, we tested different formulations of the audience estimation question. variations included comparing “saw the content” to “read the content”, as well as different wordings asking for raw numbers, percentages, and likert- style radio button responses. the results were similar for all formulations. however, it is possible that some participants still ﬁltered out users who they think might not have paid at- tention to the content. in addition, the survey format did not go into depth on participants’ perceptions: interviews could further explore this phenomenon. our methods introduce sampling bias. our log data selects for active users, in particular those who produce content. the survey also selects for users who produce content, those who log in to facebook, and those who care enough about face- book to participate in a survey advertised at the top of the news feed. one known bias is that active users can have larger friend counts than the typical facebook population. design implications this research raises the question of whether showing actual audience information might beneﬁt social media. this design might come in many ﬂavors: highlighting close friends who saw the post, showing a count but no names or faces, or (in the extreme) showing a complete list of every person who saw the post. some facebook groups now display how many group members have seen each post, while sites such as okcupid show who has browsed your proﬁle. adding audience infor- mation could certainly address the current mismatch between perceived and actual audience size. our results do not paint a clear picture as to whether audience information would be a good addition. some measure of so- cial translucence and plausible deniability seems helpful: au- dience members might not want to admit they saw each piece of content, and sharers might be disappointed to know that many people saw the post but nobody commented or “liked” session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 28


it. underestimating the audience might also be a comfort- able equilibrium for some users who feel more comfortable speaking to a relatively small group and would not post if they knew that they were performing in front of a large audience. on the other hand, many users expressed a desire for a larger audience, and demonstrating that they do in fact have a large audience might make them more excited to participate. pragmatically, this work suggests that social media systems might do well to let their users know that they are impacting their audience. because so many members of the audience provide no feedback, there may be other ways to emphasize that users have an engaged audience. this might involve em- phasizing cumulative feedback (e.g., 400 friends saw their content last month), showing relative audience sizes for posts without sharing raw numbers, or encouraging alternate modes of feedback [3]. conclusion we have demonstrated that users’ perceptions of their audi- ence size in social media do not match reality. by combining survey and log analysis, we quantiﬁed the difference between users’ estimated audience and their actual reach. users un- derestimate their audience on speciﬁc posts by a factor of four, and their audience in general by a factor of three. half of users want to reach larger audiences, but they are already reaching much larger audiences than they think. log anal- ysis of updates from 220,000 facebook users suggests that feedback, friend count, and past audience size are all highly variable predictors of audience size, so it would be difﬁcult for a user to predict their audience size reliably. put simply, users do not receive enough feedback to be aware of their audience size. however, facebook users do manage to reach 35% of their friends with each post and 61% of their friends over the course of a month. where previous work focuses on publicly visible signals such as reshares and diffusion processes, this research suggests that traditionally invisible behavioral signals may be just as important to understanding social media. future work will further elaborate these ideas. for example, audience com- position is an important element of media performance [26], and we do not yet know whether users accurately estimate which individuals are likely to see a post. we can also isolate the causal impact of estimated audience size on behavior, for example whether differences in perceived audience size cause users to share more or less. finally, these results suggest that there are deeper biases and heuristics active when users esti- mate quantities about social networks, and these biases war- rant deeper investigation. acknowledgments we would like to thank our survey participants for their in- sight and time. in addition, we thank cameron marlow, dan rubinstein, sriya santhanam and the facebook data science team for valuable feedback. references 1. a. acquisti and r. gross. imagined communities: awareness, information sharing, and privacy on the facebook. in privacy enhancing technologies, pages 36–58. springer, 2006. 2. i. altman. the environment and social behavior: privacy, personal space, territory, and crowding. eric, 1975. 3. p. andré, m. bernstein, and k. luther. who gives a tweet?: evaluating microblog content value. in proc. cscw 2012, 2012. 4. l. backstrom, e. bakshy, j. kleinberg, t. lento, and i. rosenn. center of attention: how facebook users allocate attention across friends. in proc. icwsm 2011, 2011. 5. e. bakshy, j. hofman, w. mason, and d. watts. everyone’s an inﬂuencer: quantifying inﬂuence on twitter. in proc. wsdm 2011, 2011. 6. e. bakshy, i. rosenn, c. marlow, and l. adamic. the role of social networks in information diffusion. in proceedings of the 21st international conference on world wide web, www ’12, 2012. 7. m. bernstein, a. marcus, d. karger, and r. miller. enhancing directed content sharing on the web. in proc. chi 2010, 2010. 8. d. boyd. friends, friendsters, and myspace top 8: writing community into being on social network sites. first monday, 11(12), 2006. 9. d. boyd. social network sites: public, private, or what? knowledge tree, 13(1):1–7, 2007. 10. m. burke, c. marlow, and t. lento. feed me: motivating newcomer contribution in social network sites. in proc. chi 2009, 2009. 11. k. caine, l. kisselburgh, and l. lareau. audience visualization inﬂuences disclosures in online social networks. in ext. abst. chi 2011, 2011. 12. h. clark and g. murphy. audience design in meaning and reference. advances in psychology, 9:287–299, 1982. 13. s. counts and k. fisher. taking it all in? visual attention in microblog consumption. proc. icwsm 2011, 2011. 14. n. ellison et al. social network sites: deﬁnition, history, and scholarship. journal of computer-mediated communication, 13(1):210–230, 2007. 15. t. erickson and w. kellogg. social translucence: an approach to designing systems that support social processes. acm tochi, 7(1):59–83, 2000. 16. e. gilbert. designing social translucence over social networks. in proc. chi 2012, 2012. 17. e. goffman. the presentation of self in everyday life. garden city, ny, 1959. 18. s. gosling, s. gaddis, s. vazire, et al. personality impressions based on facebook proﬁles. in proc. icwsm 2007, 2007. session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 29


19. j. hancock, j. birnholtz, n. bazarova, j. guillory, j. perlin, and b. amos. butler lies: awareness, deception and design. in proc. chi 2009, 2009. 20. b. hogan. the presentation of self in the age of social media: distinguishing performances and exhibitions online. bulletin of science, technology & society, 30(6):377–386, 2010. 21. p. killworth, e. johnsen, h. bernard, g. ann shelley, and c. mccarty. estimating the size of personal networks. social networks, 12(4):289–312, 1990. 22. h. kwak, h. chun, and s. moon. fragile online relationship: a ﬁrst look at unfollow dynamics in twitter. in proc. chi 2011, 2011. 23. c. lampe, n. ellison, and c. steinﬁeld. a familiar face (book): proﬁle elements as signals in an online social network. in proc. chi 2007, 2007. 24. c. lampe, n. ellison, and c. steinﬁeld. changes in use and perception of facebook. in proc. cscw 2008, 2008. 25. e. lieberman and r. miller. facemail: showing faces of recipients to prevent misdirected email. in proc. soups 2007, 2007. 26. a. marwick et al. i tweet honestly, i tweet passionately: twitter users, context collapse, and the imagined audience. new media & society, 13(1):114–133, 2011. 27. c. mccarty, p. killworth, h. bernard, e. johnsen, and g. shelley. comparing two methods for estimating network size. human organization, 60(1):28–39, 2001. 28. r. metz. friendster outs voyeurs. wired, 2005. 29. b. nonnecke and j. preece. lurker demographics: counting the silent. in proc. chi 2000, 2000. 30. l. palen and p. dourish. unpacking privacy for a networked world. in proc. chi 2003, 2003. 31. b. suh, l. hong, p. pirolli, and e. chi. want to be retweeted? large scale analytics on factors impacting retweet in twitter network. in proc. socialcom 2010, 2010. 32. j. y. tsai, p. kelley, p. drielsma, l. f. cranor, j. hong, and n. sadeh. who’s viewed you?: the impact of feedback in a mobile location-sharing application. in proc. chi 2009, 2009. 33. z. tufekci. can you see me now? audience and disclosure regulation in online social network sites. bulletin of science, technology & society, 28(1):20–36, 2008. 34. z. tufekci. facebook, youth and privacy in networked publics. in proc. icwsm 2012, 2012. 35. a. tversky and d. kahneman. availability: a heuristic for judging frequency and probability. cognitive psychology, 5(2):207–232, 1973. 36. j. ugander, b. karrer, l. backstrom, and c. marlow. the anatomy of the facebook social graph. corr, abs/1111.4503, 2011. 37. f. viégas. bloggers’ expectations of privacy and accountability: an initial survey. journal of computer-mediated communication, 10(3), 2005. 38. f. viégas and j. donath. chat circles. in proc. chi 1999, 1999. 39. a. young and a. quan-haase. information revelation and internet privacy concerns on social network sites: a case study of facebook. in proc. c&t 2009, 2009. session: managing social media chi 2013: changing perspectives, paris, france 30
