

  a study of tabbed browsing among mozilla firefox users  patrick dubroy, ravin balakrishnan  department of computer science  university of toronto  {dubroy, ravin}@dgp.toronto.edu    abstract  we present a study which investigated how and why users  of mozilla firefox use multiple tabs and windows during  web browsing. the detailed web browsing usage of 21  participants was logged over a period of 13 to 21 days each,  and was supplemented by qualitative data from diary entries  and interviews. through an examination of several  measures of their tab usage, we show that our participants  had a strong preference for the use of tabs rather than  multiple windows. we report the reasons they cited for  using tabs, and the advantages over multiple windows. we  identify several common tab usage patterns which browsers  could explicitly support. finally, we look at how tab usage  affects web page revisitation. most of our participants  switched tabs more often than they used the back button,  making tab switching the second most important navigation  mechanism in the browser, after link clicking.  author keywords  www, web browsing, hypertext, tabs, tabbed document  interfaces, web browser interfaces.  acm classification keywords  h5.4. hypertext/hypermedia: user issues, navigation.   general terms  human factors  introduction  despite the fact that both web browser usage and the web  itself have changed immensely since inception, there have  been very few significant changes to the user interface of  mainstream web browsers. a user familiar with the  browsers of the mid-1990s would likely have no trouble  using the latest versions of today's most popular browsers,  microsoft internet explorer and mozilla firefox. the main  navigation mechanisms—hyperlinks, the back and forward  buttons, the url bar, bookmarks, and the history—have  remained almost unchanged for more than 14 years. one  exception is the inclusion of tabbed browsing—which  allows multiple web pages to be open concurrently under a  single top-level browser window, each page in its own  “tab”—as a standard part of the browser interface.   according to estimates [1, 3], 50% of people now use a  browser that supports tabbed browsing. this figure is  expected to continue to increase, as internet explorer users  upgrade to the latest version, and alternatives such as  firefox and safari continue to gain market share.   during the same time period, there has been a rise in the  usage of web-based applications—such as google’s web- based office suite, and web-based email clients—which  replace conventional desktop applications. as a result, web  browsing is ceasing to become the only task that people  perform using a browser. rather, the browser is becoming  an alternative interface for many traditional computing  tasks. the growing popularity of tabbed browsing may  reflect the desire of browser users to have better ways of  managing the increasing complexity of their activities on  the web.  problems with tabs  while tabs are intended to make it easier for users to  organize and manage web browsing sessions, they also  introduce some potential problems. first, tabs are another  organization and task management system that is  completely separate from the mechanisms provided by the  operating system. for example, in microsoft windows, one  can use the taskbar to switch between open applications, but  only the currently active tab in a browser window will show  up in the taskbar. similarly, on mac os x, the exposé  feature allows the user to quickly see a thumbnail image of  all open windows, but this will not include any inactive tabs  in web browser windows.  another potential problem with tabbed browsing is that it  interferes with the use of the back button. studies have  consistently found that the back button is the second most  commonly used navigation mechanism [6, 14, 16], behind  clicking on hyperlinks. (note that when we refer to use of  the back button, we also include all its keyboard shortcuts.)  the use of multiple tabs complicates the use of the back  button, because each tab has its own history stack. even if a  tab was opened by clicking on a link, the back button will  not take you back to the originating page, because it is in  another tab.  finally, tabbed browsing adds another level of complexity  to the web browser interface. tabs add more visual clutter  to the user interface, and like managing applications and  windows, tab management becomes another necessary task  that distracts from the ultimate goal at hand.  permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are  not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  chi 2010, april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, georgia, usa.  copyright 2010 acm  978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00.    chi 2010: browsing april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 673


    motivation  despite these issues, tabs seem to be a very popular feature  among web browser users. during preliminary  investigations, we found that many people find tabs to be an  indispensable feature. perhaps the issues we described do  not actually create significant problems for users, or maybe  the advantages of using tabs simply outweigh the negatives.  given the increasing reliance on the web browser as the  interface to more of our computing applications, it is  important that we understand how and why people use tabs,  in order to guide the design of future web browser  interfaces by appropriate usage data. our study provides  data in this regard, as well as insight into what purposes  tabs serve, and how tabs relate to other features of the web  browser and the overall computing experience.    related work  long-term click-stream logging  several studies have used client-side “click-stream” logs to  study web browsing behaviour. in one of the earliest,  catledge and pitkow [6] used an instrumented version of  xmosiac to record the actions of 107 participants over the  course of 21 days. a few years later, tauscher and  greenberg [16] performed a similar study, analyzing the  revisitation patterns of 23 people over the course of 5–6  weeks each. their study defined the recurrence rate as the  probability that any url visited is a repeat of a previous  visit, and found a mean recurrence rate of 58% across their  participants, and 61% from 55 of the subjects from the  catledge and pitkow study. based on these findings, they  concluded that the web can be a characterized as a  “recurrent system.”   both these studies examined the percentage of navigation  actions caused by the various navigation mechanisms of the  browser, and found that clicking on hyperlinks is the most  frequent cause of navigation actions, followed by  backtracking (using the back button or one of its shortcuts).  catledge and pitkow [6] found that clicking on links  accounted for 52% of navigation actions, and backtracking  41%. tauscher and greenberg [16] found both of these  numbers to be lower, at ~40% and ~30%, respectively.  these two studies were performed in the mid-1990s, when  the web was still in its infancy. given the evolution since  then of both the web and web browser user interfaces, it is  questionable how applicable the results are today. in 2004  and 2005, weinreich et al. [17, 18] conducted a long-term  click-stream study of 25 participants over a period of 52- 195 days. they re-confirmed link clicking and the back  button to be the most common causes of navigation actions,  but found that backtracking accounted for a much smaller  percentage, only 14.3%. other recent studies have found  this number to be slightly higher: milic-frayling, et al.  [13](23%); and kellar et al. [12] (19%).  qualitative studies of user behaviour on the web  while low-level click-stream studies like the ones  mentioned above can provide a great deal of insight, they  do not capture the whole picture. without knowing why  people use the web the way they do, it is difficult to  strongly infer implications for design. hence, other studies  have attempted to supplement click-stream data with  qualitative information provided by the user.  byrne et al. [4] videotaped 8 participants who used a verbal  protocol during web browsing to describe what they were  doing. from this data, the researchers extracted a taxonomy  of web browsing tasks at a similar level as previous click- stream studies, but capturing the user's goals rather than just  the observed behaviour.  choo et al. [7] performed a higher-level categorization of  information seeking tasks. they studied the web browsing  behaviour of 34 knowledge workers over a period of two  weeks. in follow-up interviews, participants were asked to  recall and discuss “critical events”. through analysis of  these interviews, the researchers identified four high-level  categories of information seeking. the approach taken in  this study was quite similar to that used in our study.  however, the click-stream logs were only used to support  their qualitative analysis, whereas in our study, the  quantitative and qualitative results are complementary.  sellen et al. [15] observed 24 knowledge workers for two  days each. at the end of each day, participants were  interviewed in front of their browser history, and asked to  describe each of the activities that they performed. the  analysis divided the activities into 6 main categories of  behaviour. like [7], they focused on the qualitative results.  kellar et al. [12] performed a study that used click-stream  data while also asking participants to categorize their  current task into one of five categories. although the goals  of their study were different from ours, as they sought to  understand how tasks influenced user behaviour, their  approach was quite similar, as both the quantitative and  qualitative results were presented with equal importance.  study background  broadly speaking, tabs serve two main functions. first,  using multiple tabs allows you to put a page aside and  return to it later. in a way, this can also be accomplished  using the back button, bookmarks, and the history. with  tabs, however, you can have many pages open concurrently  and switch between them in any order. the same thing can  be accomplished using multiple windows. in most  browsers, new windows and new tabs can be created in  very similar ways.     the second major function of tabs is the ability to “fork the  chain of navigation”. a link can be opened in a new tab  without disturbing the current page. for example, on a  search results page, one might open several links in new  tabs, allowing the ability to switch between the tabs to  compare the various results.  it is also possible to open a link in a new window. the main  difference between opening a link in a new tab versus a  chi 2010: browsing april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 674


  new window is that new tabs can be opened in the  background without disturbing the current page. you can  switch to the new page right away, or stay on the current  page and view the new page later. new windows, on the  other hand, generally open in the foreground, taking focus  away from the current window.  thus, the major functionality of tabs—with the exception of  being able to open links in the background—can be  duplicated by using multiple windows. and a major part of  that functionality can also be accomplished, albeit with a  few key differences, by using the traditional revisitation  mechanisms: the back button, the history, and bookmarks.  given that most tab functionality is not fundamentally new  or different, then the popularity of tabs indicates that they  likely have some more subtle advantages over using  multiple windows and the traditional browser revisitation  mechanisms. our study seeks to discover these advantages.  methodology  participants  21 people (13 female, 8 male; 15 aged 18-29, 4 in their 30s,  and 2 in their 50s) were recruited via email through the  extended network of the researchers, and by posters on  bulletin boards around campus. the study was advertised as  “a research study exploring how people use web browsers”,  looking for participants who “use mozilla firefox for  several hours a day, and often use multiple tabs or  windows.” the goal of our study was to learn how and why  tabs are used by active tab users. in order to learn the most  about different kinds of tab usage, we felt that there would  be little use in studying people who rarely use tabs. also,  while our main goal was to examine tab usage, we thought  we could gain some insight by also having participants who  use multiple windows rather than tabs. however, only one  participant showed a preference for multiple windows over  tabs.  the selection of only firefox users was pragmatic, since  firefox has a powerful extension mechanism that made it  relatively easy to write our click-stream logger. previous  studies have had participants who were either entirely from  computer science backgrounds [6, 9, 16], or mostly so  [18]. in contrast, participants in our study came from more  varied backgrounds: only 5 participants had a computer  science or engineering background, while others had  studied education, environmental science, business, and  psychology. 6 of the participants were full-time students,  and 15 were working in office environments where they  spent most of their time on the computer.  instruments and data collection  four types of data were collected from study participants.  our firefox extension gathered click-stream logs and free- form diary entries. the researchers also interviewed each  participant 2–4 times over the course of the study, and some  basic demographic data was collected via a pre-study  questionnaire.  click-stream data  click-stream data was collected using a custom extension  for firefox that was compatible with firefox versions 1.5  through 3.0 so that it could be installed without upgrading  or significantly changing the user's browsing environment.  participants were asked to install the extension on their  primary computer. the extension logged low-level user  interface and network events, and linked related events  together at a level of granularity similar to [12].   in order to collect results that accurately represented the  natural web usage of our participants, we felt that it was  important to take several steps to protect their privacy.  first, the actual urls and sites that participants visited  were not made available to the researchers. however, in  order to determine the relationships between the various  pages that each participant viewed over the course of the  study, our extension associated a unique code for each site  and url that the participant visited. in this way, we were  able to determine (for example) whether a particular page  had been previously visited, or whether a link led to a new  site or to another page on the same site.  the second step that we took to protect the privacy of our  participants was to ensure that our extension did not  automatically submit any information to the researchers. all  of the click-stream data was stored in a human-readable  format, which the participants could review before  manually submitting to the researchers via email.  diary entries and interviews  qualitative data was obtained from the participants in  several ways. first, using random sampling, our extension  periodically prompted the user to make a short diary entry  describing what windows and tabs they had open, and why  they had them open. these prompts were designed to be  unobtrusive, so that our extension wasn't overly distracting  or annoying. the prompts appeared as a banner at the top of  the current page. the user could choose to ignore any of the  prompts without taking any explicit action.  due to the short nature of the diary entries, there was little  information that could be directly extracted from them.  overall, the diary entries served less as a data-collection  mechanism, and more as the structure around which to  conduct the interviews. many participants commented that  the prompts caused them to reflect on their tab usage in a  way that they previously hadn't.   before each interview, the researchers reviewed the  participant’s logs, including his or her diary entries, and  identified any interesting aspects to discuss during the  interview, including any unusual or anomalous events in the  logs. for example, if a participant didn't usually use  multiple browser windows but did on one specific occasion,  the researchers asked the participant for further details.  procedure  after completing the initial questionnaire and installing the  extension, each participant was instructed by one of the  chi 2010: browsing april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 675


    researchers on how the diary entries would work, and then  the researchers scheduled a time for the first interview.  participants were asked to email their logs to the  researchers at a point prior to the next scheduled interview.  once the logs were received by the researchers, they were  examined for any events that required follow-up. this was  determined on a case-by-case basis by the researchers,  looking for diary entries that were unclear, or any  anomalous or exceptional events that required description.  interviews were conducted either in person or by phone,  and varied in length from 15–45 minutes.    at the end of the two week period, participants were given  instructions on how to remove the firefox extension and all  associated logs. for participants who had only installed the  extension on their work computer, an effort was made to  extend the study to a full 14 days of use. after the extension  was uninstalled, participants were paid $50 for their  participation in the study. one participant (participant 8)  opted to end participation part way through the study.  data analysis  the two main sources of data analyzed were the click- stream logs (for quantitative results) and the interviews.  the quantitative data analysis was done through a set of  custom scripts written in python. interviews were audio  recorded and transcribed by the researchers and a research  assistant. for the qualitative data analysis, analysis codes  were developed in a first pass through the interview  transcripts using open coding. a research assistant  performed an independent open coding pass on a subset of  the data, and the final set of codes was agreed upon by the  two coders. finally, all of the data was coded independently  by the two coders, and all discrepancies were discussed  until agreement was reached.  results  rather than present the results of our quantitative and  qualitative analysis separately, we take a more holistic  approach, presenting the results organized under three  themes. first, we demonstrate that participants in our study  showed a marked preference for the use of tabs over  multiple windows, and we discuss our participants' stated  reasons for this preference. second, we take a closer look at  the tab usage of our participants. we examine several  measures of tab usage from the click-stream logs, and  identify a subset of users (“tab power users”) who used tabs  much more frequently than the others. we discuss our  participants' reported reasons for using tabs, and identify a  key difference between the tab power users and the others:  the tab power users reported habitually opening links in  new tabs. third, we examine in greater depth one aspect of  tab usage which we believe to be particularly significant:  the use of tabs as a revisitation mechanism.  analysis methods  in our call for participation, we asked for mozilla firefox  users who “often use multiple tabs or windows.” this is a  subjective description that needs to be quantified. what  does it mean to “use” multiple tabs or windows, and how  should it be measured? there are several possible answers.  number of tabs or windows created. new tabs or windows  may be created by the user, or automatically by a web site;  we counted both. we did not count windows or tabs created  automatically on browser startup.   number of focus switches. since a new tab must be  switched to in order to use it, we consider tab switches to be  a similar and better measure of tab usage than tab creation.   number of concurrent tabs and windows. we measured the  number of windows and tabs that were open when a  navigation event occurred, as in weinreich et al. [18]. for  simplicity, we ignored all navigation events caused by  firefox's session restore feature in calculating this measure.  in order to facilitate comparisons between participants, in  some cases we normalized the measures by dividing by the  total number of navigation actions (excluding session  restore) for the participant. we refer to the normalized  measures as the window creation rate, tab creation rate,  and tab switch rate.  use of multiple windows vs. tabs  click-stream analysis  figure 1 shows the window and tab creation rates of all  participants as calculated from the click-stream logs.  only one participant (p10) had a window creation rate higher  than the tab usage rate—she was the only one who was more  likely to create a new window than an additional tab in an  existing window. she created a new window more than three  times more often than a tab, and created a total of 338  windows over the course of the study, more than any other  participant. however, only 19% of the windows were created  intentionally. this means that she frequently uses sites (or  one particular site) where links open in a new window.   apart from p10, only three other participants used windows  nearly as often as they used tabs: p15, p11, and p18. the  remaining 17 participants were at least twice as likely to  create an additional tab rather than an additional window. so,  despite our call for participation asking for people who  “frequently use multiple tabs or windows,” there was a strong  bias towards the use of tabs over windows.    figure 1: window and tab creation rates  chi 2010: browsing april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 676


  qualitative comparisons  since using tabs is functionally very similar to using  multiple windows, one of the first questions we asked  participants in our study was, “before you used a browser  that supported tabs, did you use multiple windows in the  same way that you use tabs now?” 17 of the 21 participants  said that they use tabs more frequently than they used  multiple windows in the past. many of the participants,  including all four who reported using multiple windows  heavily in the past, expressed a preference for tabs.   these subjective reports reinforce the results presented  above that most participants in our study showed a strong  preference for multiple tabs rather than multiple windows.  our participants cited many different reasons why using  multiple tabs is preferable to using multiple windows. the  most common reason (cited by 10 of 21 people) was that  using tabs is cleaner, more organized, or less cluttered.  “it was more messy, i think. like when you have all these  multiple windows open […] it was more confusing.” (p13)  this result was a bit surprising, because it's not clear how  exactly tabs are more organized than multiple windows.  most of our participants used microsoft windows, where  multiple browser windows would be accessed via the task  bar along the bottom, quite similar to how tabs are lined up  across the top of the browser window.   five participants said that it was helpful that tabs kept their  web browsing “all in one place,” whereas multiple browser  windows would be interspersed with other application  windows. this could be one reason why tabs are seen to be  cleaner or more organized. two participants said that  combining windows and tabs allows multiple levels of  organization, but the low window usage we observed makes  it unlikely that this is a key advantage.  the second most cited reason (by 7 of 21 participants) for  using multiple tabs instead of multiple windows was that  tabs are easier or more convenient to access or switch  between. one possible reason for this is suggested by  weinreich et al. [18], who found that 45% of all link clicks  occurred in the upper left quadrant of the browser window.  if a person is much more likely to click on a link near the  top of the page (for whatever reason), it might be easier or  more convenient to click on a tab that is nearby, rather than  on the taskbar at the very bottom of the screen.   seven participants reported that the way windows xp and  windows vista group windows in the taskbar (an option  which can easily be turned off) was a problem, and said that  tabs provide a better solution:  “i used to have about 15 windows in [internet] explorer.  they were all smooshed together on the task bar. [...] it  was a big pain in the [expletive deleted].” (p12)  only three people cited resource usage or performance  reasons for using tabs instead of multiple windows. some  other advantages were each mentioned by a single  participant: the order of tabs in the tab bar can be  rearranged, and new tabs can be opened in the background,  whereas new windows open in the foreground.  mixing tabs with multiple windows  although our click-stream analysis showed that 17  participants showed a very strong preference towards the  use of multiple tabs over multiple windows, in the  interviews, several people reported using multiple windows  from time to time. this was verified in the click-stream  logs: 10 participants purposely created an additional  window at least once during the course of the study. in the  interviews, more than half of our participants cited some  reason when the use of multiple windows can be useful.  one of the most commonly cited reasons (by 8 people) was  that using many tabs within separate windows can be  beneficial to create a higher-level task grouping. for  example:  “i generally don't like mixing and if i am doing two things  at once i usually have one window with all the tabs for one  thing, and one window with tabs—or even just one tab—for  something else.” (p11)  4 of the 8 participants said that they sometimes use  windows to separate work- or school-related tabs from  personal or “fun” tabs.   the other highly cited reason for using multiple windows  (also cited by 8 people) was that it makes it possible to view  two pages at the same time. this can be useful when  comparing two pages, for example, or when watching a  video while browsing some other sites.  characterizing tab usage  to get a better idea of how the tab creation rates are  distributed among our participants, figure 2 plots the tab  creation rates as a histogram. there is a very clear bi-modal  distribution. over half our participants (13/21) are clustered  around the 0.04 mark. in other words, these people created  about 4 tabs for every 100 navigation actions. the rest of  the participants are loosely centered around 0.14, meaning  that they created about 3 times as many tabs as the other  people. two participants are even higher, creating  (respectively) 17 and 22 tabs per 100 navigation actions.    figure 2: tab creation rate  chi 2010: browsing april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 677


      figure 3: number of tabs open on navigation  we refer to the 8 users in the higher part of the distribution  as “tab power users.” unsurprisingly, the four highest tab  creation rates belong to the four participants with computer  science and/or programming backgrounds (p3, p5, p14,  and p20). however, the other four participants in the high  part of the distribution are not stereotypical “power users”:  one is a civil engineer, and the others have backgrounds in  communications, marketing, and the humanities.  figure 3 shows the number of tabs open when a navigation  action occurred. the most common number of tabs to have  open is one, with a steady descent down to 9. there is a  second peak at 16 tabs, but this was almost entirely due to  just two of the participants, p14 and p20.  for further insight, we examine the median and maximum  number of tabs that each participant had open (figure 4).  participant 8’s data is omitted as he dropped out part way  through the study.  participants 14, 19 and 20 definitely stand out. participant  14 had by far the highest median number of tabs open with  17, while no other participant had a median higher than 6.  participant 20 had the highest number of tabs open at once,  with 42. the tab bar would be scrolling two or three times  over at this point. in one of his diary entries, he actually  commented about having so many tabs open, saying: “now  i am opening tabs from digg [a social news site] and they  are appearing at the end of my massive list. this is truly a  bad way to browse.”    figure 4: median and maximum number of open tabs    figure 5: tab creation rate vs. tab switch rate  p19 is interesting—he had a median of only one tab open,  but a max of 27. participant 2 is similar, but not nearly as  extreme: a median of 4 and a max of 20. even if these two  preferred not to have many tabs open most of the time, they  weren't afraid of opening lots of tabs when needed.  another tab usage measure that's interesting to look at is the  frequency of tab switching. two users may create tabs at a  similar rate, but one might switch between tabs much more  often, indicating an important distinction in usage patterns.  in figure 5, the tab creation rate is plotted against the tab  switch rate. as expected, we see a rough correlation  between the number of tabs created and the number of tab  switches that occur. intuitively, this makes sense: if more  tabs are created, more tab switches must occur in order to  make use of those tabs. there are two very clear outliers:  participants 3 and 14, two of the people identified as   “tab power users”. they switched tabs 2–3 times as often as  we would expect based on their tab creation rate. even  among participants who use tabs to a similar degree, there  is a considerable variation in the number of tab switches.  this is likely partially caused by individual differences, but  it may also be due to differences in the type of work being  done.   reasons for using tabs  in addition to quantifying tab usage, one of the main goals  of our study was to determine why people use tabs in the  way that they do. what purposes do tabs serve for them,  and what are the advantages of using tabs? we explore  these questions via our interview and diary entry data.  reminders  17 participants reported that they often use tabs as a  reminder to do something. this can be related to  multitasking; a person might begin a task and then leave the  tab open to remind them to complete.  “having the tab open is a reminder to me. […] if it’s at the  end of the day or lunch time while i am cracking a  sandwich or something and i’ll say, ‘oh yeah, i want to go  back and look at that link’ because i see the tab sitting  there.” (p16)  chi 2010: browsing april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 678


  opening links in background  14 participants—including all of the tab power users—said  that the ability to open tabs in the background was useful  because it allowed them to open several links at once. on a  page with many links—such as a search results page  (reported by 10 participants) or a news site—these users  would first open up all the links of interest, and then go on  to read the pages they had opened.  “if i search for something on google, i just go ‘right-click,  rick-click, right-click’—you know, opening all the tabs. and  then i would look at them later.” (p2)  p20 reported that “most links that i click […] like when i do  a google search, i hold on ctrl and click on links.” he also  reported doing this on digg, a social news site.  a similar behaviour reported by 6 of the same 14  participants was opening a link in the background while  continuing to read the current page. p19, who reported  using tabs heavily on wikipedia, said:  “usually i find interesting links halfway through the  article, and that's why i like tabs.”  although being able to open links in the background  instead of the foreground may seem like a subtle difference,  these examples show that it can have a significant effect on  the way that people browse.  in fact, this behaviour of opening links in new tabs is likely  one of the major differences between the tab power users  and the other participants. every single one of the tab  power users—and none of the other participants—reported  that opening links in new tabs had become habitual:  “usually i have this sort of reflex of right-clicking and  saying ‘open in a new tab’.” (p2)   “most of the time, over 70% of the time, opening a new link  means to be opening a new tab.” (p20)  p21 had even installed a firefox extension which opened  every link in a new tab. when asked how she would use  google without tabs, she said, “i couldn’t imagine it.”  a common behaviour that seemed to coincide with opening  many links at once can be termed a process of elimination.  11 participants reported having a set of tabs open for a task,  and pruning it to a smaller set of the most useful tabs. this  could be especially useful during an open-ended search  task, when the ultimate goal of the search is not known.  multitasking    another highly-cited reason for using tabs (cited by 11 of  21 participants) was to facilitate multitasking: putting the  current task on hold and switching to a tab to perform a new  task. in many cases, the participants indicated that the  current task was being put on hold for only a short period.  for example:   “just a quick little side task, when, you know, i want to  come right back to what i was working on.” (p1)  going “back and forth”    10 participants reported using tabs for comparing between  two pages, and 13 reported using tabs to switch back and  forth between two or more pages. in many cases, the back  button could have accomplished the same task, but  participants generally reported that using tabs was easier.   frequently used pages    4 participants mentioned keeping a page open in a tab when  it was being used frequently. for example, one participant  was a graduate student and said that he found it convenient  to keep open in a tab the web page for a course he was  teaching. interestingly, he said that it was easier to look for  the tab that was already open—even if it meant scrolling  through the tab bar—rather than clicking on the button in  his bookmarks toolbar: “it might not be actually faster  physically, but it's easier.”  short-term bookmarks  4 participants reported using tabs as a kind of short-term  bookmark. for example:  “if it is something i plan to refer back to in the near future,  like later that day or the next day, […] sometimes i'll leave  the tab open.” (p16)  similarly, 11 participants mentioned using multiple tabs  when they were planning to return to a page at some  unspecified point in the future. 10 participants also  mentioned leaving a page open in a tab even if they weren't  entirely sure they'd actually return to the page.  “i will often lose interest in something, and i think i might  go back to it, so i will leave the tab open and open a new  one. i don’t necessarily always go back to them, but the  opportunity is there if i want to.” (p12)  this is interesting, because it shows that many people don’t  associate a high cost with leaving a tab open in the browser;  it is worth keeping around even if they are not sure that they  are going to return to it. this was reinforced by the 12  participants who reported that they generally didn’t make  an effort to close tabs when they were finished with them.  the relationship between tabs and revisitation  the use of tabs can be seen as a kind of revisitation  mechanism, providing a shortcut for returning to  previously-visited pages. however, using tabs is distinctly  different from the traditional revisitation mechanisms—the  back button, the history, and bookmarks—because the  current page and its navigation history can be left as-is and  returned to later, without reloading or re-rendering the page.  numerous studies have examined and characterized web  page revisitation. however, most of those studies took place  before tabbed browsing was widely used, with the  exception of recent studies by adar et al. [2] and weinreich  et al. [18].  decreased use of the back button  previous studies on revisitation have noted that a relatively  large portion of navigation actions are caused by the use of  chi 2010: browsing april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 679


    the back button. however, this seems to be following a  downward trend. in catledge and pitkow's study [6], the  back button accounted for 41% of all navigation actions. a  few years later, tauscher and greenberg [16] found that it  only accounted for about 30%. in one of the more recent  studies, weinreich et al. [14] found it to be only 14%.  because tabs offer a kind of revisitation, one would expect  that the use of other browser revisitation mechanisms would  be significantly lower among people who use tabs (or  multiple windows) frequently. indeed, weinreich et al. [17]  found that this was true: for participants who used tabs or  multiple windows frequently, the back button accounted for  about 10% of navigation actions, compared to 14% for their  entire study population.  in our study, the back button accounted for a median of  7.1% of navigation actions. among the group of tab power  users, the median was 5.8%. the participant with the lowest  tab creation rate, p12, was also the highest user of the back  button. this data supports the hypothesis put forth by  weinreich et al. that increased use of multiple windows and  tabs results in decreased use of the back button.  measuring tab revisitation  one of the events logged by our extension was the tab  select event. at any time, there is exactly one selected tab  in every open window. for any given tab, it can be selected  zero or more times over its lifetime. a tab can be selected  zero times if it is opened in the background (e.g. by ctrl- clicking on a link) and either the tab, the window, or the  browser is closed without the user having selected the tab.  figure 6 shows a histogram showing how often tabs are  selected over the entire lifetime of the tab.  across all of our participants, we found that 45% of tabs  were selected exactly once. as we saw in figure 3, the  largest portion of navigation events during the study  happened with only one tab open, and figure 6 showed that  7 participants had a median of only one or two tabs open.  from this, we can posit that it's common to have a window  that never has more than one tab in it. this case might  account for many of the tabs that were selected exactly  once. another possibility is that it's related to one kind of  multitasking described in the previous section—a short- term sub-task or “side task.” many tabs may be opened  with a particular purpose and closed as soon as the task is  complete. surprisingly, 25% of tabs were never selected.  that is, they were opened but not switched to before the  tab, or the entire window, was closed. the remaining 30%  of tabs were switched to multiple times. so, more than two  thirds of tabs are used once or less.  however, if we examine the number of tab-switch  revisitations compared to the total number of tab switches,  it paints a different picture. a median of 73.3% of tab  switches were revisitations. this varied between  participants, from 45% to 91%, but the aggregate total  across all participants was 77.7%, quite close to the median.     figure 6: frequency of tab selection  this shows that a large percentage (and for all but two  participants, a majority) of tab switches are revisitations.  but how does it compare to conventional revisitation?  figure 7 shows the rate of tab revisitation compared to  conventional revisitation (i.e. page reloads).  participants are sorted from lowest tab revisitation rate (on  the left) to the highest. on the right side, we see 5  participants who have a tab revisitation rate higher than the  rate of conventional revisitation. that is, if they were  viewing a page previously viewed at any point during the  study, it was more likely that they switched to a tab  containing that page, rather than reloading the page in some  way. two of these participants actually had more tab- switch revisitations than total navigation actions (excluding  session restore).  5 more participants had a tab revisitation rate that was at  least 75% of the conventional revisitation rate, while the  remaining 11 participants had a significantly higher rate of  conventional revisitation than tab revisitation.  one more interesting thing to note is that for 17 of the 21  participants, tab switching was more frequent that back  navigation. this is especially significant because previous  studies have consistently shown that the back button (and  its shortcuts) is the second most frequently used navigation  method, behind clicking on hyperlinks.    figure 7: tab switch and conventional (page reload)  revisitation  chi 2010: browsing april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 680


  tabs compared to other revisitation mechanisms  we have shown that tabs are often used as a kind of  revisitation mechanism. but web browsers already provide  three special mechanisms for revisitation: the back button,  the history, and bookmarks. why would people instead  choose to use tabs for revisitation?  the major difference between using tabs for revisitation is  that switching to a tab does not cause the page to be  reloaded again, whereas using the back button, history, or a  bookmark does. reloading the page might be desirable,  because it allows you to see any information that has  changed. however, reloading the page might also mean that  you lose some of the state on the page. six participants  mentioned keeping a page open in a tab when they wanted  it to stay “as-is”, and three people said that they liked the  fact that when they switched back to a tab, they could return  to the exact place in the page as when they left. this is not  true of bookmarks or the history, and although the back  button in firefox does restore the position, it does not do so  until after the page has reloaded, and is not as reliable.  7 participants said that tabs are quicker or more efficient for  returning to a previously-viewed page than using the back  button. 6 said that it is generally better, easier, or more  convenient to use tabs instead of the back button.  “i don’t have to remember exactly where i was. i can just  go back to the tab instead of [pressing] the back button  […]. it is right there.” (p12)  4 participants said they liked that tabs would keep their spot  on the page. 6 people said that the back button can require  too many or an unknown number of clicks to get back to a  desired page, whereas returning to a tab is more predictable:  “you might have to click the back button like six times to  get back to where you were. or maybe never even find it  again […] whereas the tab just kind of stays at the  originating page.” (p11)  4 people mentioned the visual or spatial aspect of tabs being  an advantage over the back button:  “[using tabs] really gives me the big picture of where  everything is at. so spatially, kind of, my head knows which  ones i've clicked on and which ones i've read.” (p10)  as previously mentioned, several people reported using a  tab like a short-term bookmark. no one mentioned any  specific advantages that tabs had for that purpose, but  several reported that they do not use bookmarks very often.  these reports correspond to the relatively low use of  bookmarks reported in previous studies. those studies have  shown the use of the browser history to be even lower than  bookmarks, usually accounting for a fraction of a percent of  all navigation actions. none of our participants claimed to  make regular use of the browser history, so they were  unable to make any comparisons with their usage of tabs.  implications for design  our participants’ comments point to several aspects of the  browser user interface that are perceived to be lacking.  while tabbed browsing provides a possible solution, an  alternative is to address the core problem. our study  suggests three main areas of the browser user interface that  could be improved.  advantages of using windows  although our participants generally preferred to use  multiple tabs, many of them reported reasons for using  multiple windows. the two most common reasons for using  multiple windows were for viewing multiple pages at the  same time, and for creating a higher-level task grouping.  this suggests that it could be helpful if web browsers  supported these features with multiple tabs. for example, a  simple mechanism for selecting two tabs and allowing their  contents viewed side-by-side in the browser window could  be very useful. regarding the organizational benefits of  using multiple windows, several proposals have been made  for “web workspaces” (e.g. [5, 11]) that could help organize  browsing tasks. perhaps these ideas could be revisited  within the context of tabbed browsing.  support for common tab usage patterns  we also discussed several common usage patterns that our  participants reported in the interviews. it could be useful for  future web browsers to include explicit support for these  usage patterns, e.g. for using tabs as reminders or short- term bookmarks. another common use of tabs was to open  links in the background. it might be helpful for the web  browser to show the relationships between tabs, and  distinguish new, unread tabs from others.  better revisitation mechanisms  our results also illustrate a strong relationship between tabs  and web page revisitation. we identified different ways in  which tabs serve similar purposes as the conventional  revisitation mechanisms of the browser, and reported what  our participants cited as advantages of using tab-based  revisitation instead of the back button. this indicates a need  to improve the revisitation mechanisms in browsers.  indeed, studies have pointed out the problems with the  stack-based behaviour of the back button, and have  suggested alternatives [9, 16]. there have been attempts to  design new and improved revisitation mechanisms for the  web browser, from simplified back/forward behaviour [9,  13] to systems which combine the back button, browser  history, and bookmarks in a single interface [8].  one aspect of the revisitation problem that previous studies  have not addressed is the problem of maintaining the  current page state. in our study, we found that, even if users  were confident that they could easily return to the current  page (e.g. by using the back button), they still expressed  concern that they would lose important state. future  browsers might alleviate this problem by modifying the  back button to work like tabs—i.e., when the user returns to  the page, it is in exactly the same state as they left it,  including the position of the scroll bar, etc.  chi 2010: browsing april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 681


    study limitations  the study population was limited to firefox users who  often used multiple windows or tabs during browsing. our  choice of active tab and window users was intentional, in  order to learn the most about how and why these people use  tabs. given these constraints, the population is probably  skewed towards intermediate to advanced users, which  limits the generalizability of our results. however, although  internet explorer is the most popular browser, it did not  support tabbed browsing by default until version 7.0 (the  most recent at the time of the study), whereas all versions of  firefox support tabbed browsing, so firefox users likely  comprise a significant portion of people who use tabs often.  unlike many other studies of this nature, we conducted the  study without seeing the actual sites and pages that the  participants visited. we felt that this privacy protection was  important to obtain a true representative sample of people's  browsing habits. however, it is still possible that the  participants modified their habits simply because they knew  they were being observed. as with any diary study, in order  to obtain the most relevant data, it was necessary to inform  the participants as to what aspects we were most interested  in. asking them to think about and describe their own  behaviour may have caused them to change it. however, by  conducting the study for two weeks, we hoped that these  kinds of observational effects would occur early and  diminish over the course of the study.  conclusions and future work  in this study, we gained insight into how firefox users use  multiple tabs and windows during web browsing. through  interviews, diary entries, and analysis of click-stream logs,  we have learned not only what they do, but why they do it.  we demonstrated our participants’ preference for the use of  multiple tabs rather than multiple windows, and discussed  the reasons they cited for this preference, as well as why  they still use multiple windows sometimes. we presented  several quantitative measures of our participants’ tab usage,  and discussed the reasons they cited for using multiple tabs.  we identified a subset of participants who used tabs much  more frequently than the others, and who reported that they  habitually open links in new tabs. finally, we discussed the  relationship between tab usage and web page revisitation.  we found a far lower rate of back events than previous  studies (e.g. [14]), which may be related to the use of tabs.  as web applications become more popular, the browser is  quickly becoming “the other desktop.” we are interested in  pursuing research into higher-level task management  behaviour in the browser, and how the task management  mechanisms in the browser can be better integrated into the  mechanisms provided by the operating system.  references  1. mozilla’s firefox global usage share is still growing  according to onestat.com.  http://www.onestat.com/html/aboutus_pressbox57- firefox-mozilla-ie-browser-market-share.html.  2. e. adar, j. teevan, & s. dumais. (2008). large scale  analysis of web revisitation patterns. chi. 1197–1206.  3. browser market share.  http://marketshare.hitslink.com/report.aspx?qprid=0&qpt meframe=m&qpsp=119. retrieved april 18, 2009.  4. m. byrne, b. john, n. wehrle, & d. crow. (1999). the  tangled web we wove: a taskonomy of www use. chi.  544–551.  5. s. card, g. robertson, & w. york. (1996). the webbook  and the web forager: an information workspace for the  world-wide web. chi.111-119.  6.  l.  catledge & j.  pitkow. (1995). characterizing  browsing strategies in the world-wide web. comput.  netw. isdn syst., 27(6). 1065–1073.  7. c. choo, b. detlor, & d. turnbull. (2000). information  seeking on the web: an integrated model of browsing and  searching. first monday, 5(2).  http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue5_2/choo/index .html.  8. a. cockburn, s. greenberg, s. jones, b. mckenzie, &  m. moyle. (2003). improving web page revisitation:  analysis, design and evaluation. information technology  and society, 1(3). 151–183.  9. a. cockburn, b. mckenzie, & m. smith. (2002). pushing  back: evaluating a new behaviour for the back and  forward buttons in web browsers. int. j. human- computer studies, 57(5). 397–414.  10. a. dotzler. (2005). tabbed browsing history.  http://weblogs.mozillazine.org/asa/archives/008433.html.  retrieved april 2, 2009.  11. n. jhaveri & k. räihä. (2005). the advantages of a cross- session web workspace. chi. 1949-1952.  12. m. kellar, c. watters, & m. shepherd. (2006). the  impact of task on the usage of web browser navigation  mechanisms. graphics interface. 235-242.  13. n. milic-frayling, r. jones, k. rodden, g. smyth,  a. blackwell, & r. sommerer. (2004). smartback:  supporting users in back navigation. www conference.  63–71.  14. h. obendorf, h. weinreich, e. herder, & m. mayer.  (2007). web page revisitation revisited: implications of a  long-term click-stream study of browser usage. chi. 597- 606.  15. a. sellen, r. murphy, & k. shaw. (2002). how  knowledge workers use the web. chi. 227-234.  16. l. tauscher & s. greenberg. (1997). how people revisit  web pages: empirical findings and implications for the  design of history systems. int. j. human-computer  studies, 47(1). 97–137.  17. h. weinreich, h. obendorf, e. herder, & m. mayer.  (2006). off the beaten tracks: exploring three aspects of  web navigation. www conference. 133-142.  18.h. weinreich, h. obendorf, e. herder, & m. mayer.  (2008). not quite the average: an empirical study of web  use. acm trans. web, 2(1). 1–31.   chi 2010: browsing april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 682
