

  let’s go from the whiteboard: supporting transitions   in work through whiteboard capture and reuse*  stacy branham†, gene golovchinsky‡, scott carter‡, jacob t. biehl‡ †center for human-computer interaction  virginia tech  blacksburg, va 24061  sbranham@cs.vt.edu  ‡fx palo alto laboratory, inc.  3400 hillview ave #4, palo alto, ca 94304  {gene, carter, biehl}@fxpal.com  abstract  the use of whiteboards is pervasive across a wide range of  work domains.  but some of the qualities that make them  successful—an intuitive interface, physical working space,  and easy erasure—inherently make them poor tools for  archival and reuse. if whiteboard content could be made  available in times and spaces beyond those supported by  the whiteboard alone, how might it be appropriated? we  explore this question via reboard, a system that  automatically captures whiteboard images and makes them  accessible through a novel set of user-centered access tools.  through the lens of a seven week workplace field study,  we found that by enabling new workflows, reboard  increased the value of whiteboard content for collaboration.  author keywords  whiteboards, workflow, information reuse and sharing  acm classification keywords  h5.m. information interfaces and presentation (e.g., hci):  miscellaneous.  general terms  human factors  introduction  the whiteboard has become an iconic tool for grounded  communication, creative ideation, and cognitive offloading.  its adoption and utility can be attributed to its strengths as a  low-tech, large-screen display that permits quick, light- weight content creation. on the other hand, whiteboard  space is limited, and once erased, content is gone for good.  this limitation often means that one must erase board  content before its useful life has expired. furthermore,  content has utility only when the board is in view. these  shortcomings provide an interesting space for exploration:  how should whiteboard content be captured and made  accessible for future use? furthermore, as previously raised  by mynatt [16] but not yet addressed by the research  community, how will the ability to retrieve past whiteboard  content affect whiteboard use?  to answer these questions, we have developed reboard  [7]––a research platform that augments any whiteboard  (including electronic ones) to enable users to retrieve,  reflect upon, and repurpose board content long after its  initial creation, whether it is still on the board or not.  reboard’s mixed-initiative capture system and metadata- rich retrieval mechanisms that leverage people’s episodic  memory for  finding content differentiate it from systems  such as zombieboard [19]. reboard can retrieve content  by a range of metadata, including date, presence of  collaborators during content creation, relative amount of  flux in board content over time, and spatial location of  content on the board, among others. with reboard, people  can also print, email, download, and share board images.   using reboard as a vehicle for observing whiteboard  activity, we conducted a seven week field study of  whiteboard use––both pre- and post-reboard activation–– in a corporate office setting. our procedure involved a pilot  deployment of reboard, a heuristic evaluation of the  system, a 1.5 week observation of existing whiteboard  practices, and a five and a half week deployment of the  reboard system. our observations suggest that whiteboard  content has value beyond the board on which it is created.  giving people the ability to access their board remotely and  to look back in time creates new work flows around sharing  and reuse, and therefore increases the content’s value.   background  whiteboard-related research has a long history in hci.  researchers have been probing issues of large, stylus-based  electronic displays—often in the domain of capturing  collaborative design (e.g., [6,9,13])—since the early 1990s.  in more recent work, the whiteboard has been identified as  a quintessential medium for ideation in work contexts. in  this vein, there have been a number of efforts to build a  grounded set of contextual descriptions of whiteboard use  [3,16,18,22,24] towards informing design of augmented  and electronic whiteboard systems [10,14,16,19,24]. al- though the potential for reuse of traditional and electronic  whiteboard content has been identified in the literature  (e.g., [10,11,17,18,22,23]), and many commercial and re- search systems allow content to be saved, reloaded and   permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for  personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies  are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that  copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. to copy  otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  chi 2010, april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, georgia, usa.  copyright 2010 acm  978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00.  * our work is inspired by cherubini et al.’s “let’s go to the  whiteboard...” [3] and tang et al.’s “supporting transitions in  work...” [22], papers that study how users bring content to the  whiteboard and how whiteboards support task transitions within their bounds. we explore how people move content from the  whiteboard and manage transitions beyond the board.  chi 2010: making meaning in large displays april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 75


  printed (e.g., [2,5,6,10,12,15,16,19,20]), they offer only  limited search and access methods. further, there is a  significant void in research that seeks to understand how  these new methods affect content reuse in real situations.   moran et al. [15] described an in-depth study on the  efficacy of electronic whiteboard reuse, but focused on the  reuse of content from collaborative technical meetings for  the purpose of generating summary reports. ju et al. [10]  discussed reuse briefly, but that system also focused on  collaborative whiteboard use in the context of a project  report. mynatt et al. [17] did not report either implementing  or evaluating the retrieval and reuse features of flatland.    figure 1. reboard system architecture.  reboard  reboard (figure 1) gathers whiteboard data via one or two  networked cameras located in the vicinity of the board. a  high resolution camera takes pictures of the board when  content changes. in some installations, a second (wide  angle) camera is used to increase accuracy of collaboration  detection. users can access whiteboard images through a  web-based application, or through a networked chumby  [4]. the former allows for detailed search, the latter for  lightweight access to most recent snaps. the following  scenario illustrates how one might interact with reboard.  after meeting with ann to plan a user study, mark returns  to his office, sketches some rough ideas for the study  design, and uses his chumby to save a picture of the board.   a few days later, he uses the web ui to find the drawing  that has since been erased from his board, and prints a  copy to bring with him to the next meeting. during the  meeting, ann uses it as a reference while they sketch some  new thoughts on her own whiteboard.   after the meeting, ann uses reboard to share the image of  her current board (that was saved automatically) showing  both the printout of the old content and the new  annotations. mark receives an email that includes a copy of  the picture and a link to the shared object.  implicit and explicit capture  as illustrated in the previous scenario, reboard  implements a mixed-initiative capture system. changes to  board content are detected and saved automatically, but the  user can also save snapshots at any time. in automatic  mode, the system attempts to detect and ignore changes due  to lighting or to the presence of people or chairs.  automation reduces the cognitive overhead of saving and  naming content [17] given the lightweight nature of  whiteboard interactions [16]. even if capture mechanisms  are sufficiently simple, studies suggest that users do not  always know when content will have future utility [10,11]  and thus may miss opportunities for reuse. on the other  hand, explicit capture can be effective when users are  changing content rapidly.     figure 2. web ui, calendar view  user-centered access methods  reboard is designed to help people find information based  on their episodic memory of prior interactions with the  board. mynatt’s work suggests that general date ranges,  thumbnails of images, and location on the board may all be  effective ways of finding archived board images [16]. in  keeping with these guidelines, reboard implements the  calendar (figure 2), timeline, and heatmap views [7]. each  view is used to select a set of board images that can then be  examined in detail. each image has a timestamp, an  optional title and description, a list of collaborators, and a  list of people with whom it is shared.     figure 3. chumby ui  dedicated control  in addition to the web interface, reboard can also be  accessed through a chumby, a touchscreen device about  the size of a mug that is capable of running simple  networked applications. the chumby ui (figure 3) was  designed to give the user one-touch access to some of the  core features of the system. the user can “snap” a picture,  “email” the latest snap to herself, “stop” or “start” the  system for privacy reasons, or navigate back and forth  chi 2010: making meaning in large displays april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 76


  among board images. in addition to these buttons, the  chumby displays the last snap of the whiteboard and the  date/time of capture. placed on a nearby desk, the chumby  is intended to make it easy for users to access reboard  with minimal disruption to their current activities.  any whiteboard will do  despite commercial offerings of electronic whiteboards for  the past 20 years, these systems have yet to replace tradi- tional whiteboards in the workplace. this lack of adoption  cannot be ascribed only to cost. electronic whiteboards fail  on a number of dimensions in comparison to traditional  whiteboards: they lack resolution, they are often turned off  to save power [8], they have technological dependencies  that often result in unreliable availability, they are not as  easy to use, input mechanisms do not provide nuanced  stroke expressions, etc. with saund [19], we believe a  camera-based approach for capturing electronic and  conventional boards is useful to accommodate physical  content (e.g., sticky notes, papers, pictures) that users often  attach to their boards. this content adds a layer of richness  and contextual reference unavailable on digital boards.  flexible export media  in addition to capturing whiteboard images and displaying  them in a web browser, reboard can also export images to  other applications. with a single click, a user can email a  whiteboard image, open it in an arbitrary application, print  it, or share it with others through reboard. this flexibility  enables appropriation [22] through reuse [18].  study  we conducted a seven week field study in a corporate  setting to better understand work practices around white- board use. the target organization was our own research  lab, comprised of nearly 50 employees with whiteboards in  their personal offices and access to two public meeting  spaces with whiteboards. we recruited 10 subjects (eight  male, two female) based on their willingness to participate.  in informal interviews, four participants claimed to use  office whiteboards rarely, while others reported moderate  to heavy use. six were research scientists, three were  software developers, and one was a multimedia specialist.   the study was carried out in two consecutive phases, the  first of which was a 1.5 week observation of current  whiteboard practices on personal whiteboards. the second  was a 5.5 week deployment of the reboard system. we  begin with the methodology and results for phase i.  study, phase i  the goal of phase i of the study was to establish a baseline  of whiteboard practice for comparison with post-reboard  deployment observations. nine of the 10 participants were  observed during this first phase. one person was excluded  because she had been exposed to reboard during early  iterations and we did not want that knowledge to affect the  results of this part of the study. in this first phase, each  office was outfitted with cameras and a chumby. while all  functional components of reboard were in place and  active, these features were not accessible to participants in  this initial stage. instead, these devices were used to collect  baseline data on whiteboard use.  data collection  we used the core reboard infrastructure to take automated  snapshots when changes to board content were detected.  this allowed us to be less intrusive in data collection, and  also to take advantage of reboard visualization and  searching tools for data analysis. furthermore, this pre- populated participants’ reboard archives with content for  potential reuse at the beginning of phase ii of the study.   in addition to automated board snapshots, we developed an  audio diary capture system for the chumbys. participants  were asked to make diary entries whenever they referred to  content on their boards. for phase i, the chumby was  configured to show only a “diary” button. pressing the  button triggered an automatic capture of the board and an  audio prompt asking the user to record a 30 second  message about the board: which content she referred to and  why, and where on the board it was. the data was saved,  and later transcribed and analyzed.  finally, we conducted hour-long semi-structured interviews  at the end of the observation period. transcripts of diary  entries were read aloud and sometimes re-played to trigger  participants’ memories of board activities. photographs  collected during the observation period were printed and  used for grounding discussion of board use. participants  were asked to group board content changes, to specify  which were collaborative, and then to identify whether the  content had temporal value (i.e., useful after at least one  day after creation) and/or spatial value (i.e., useful to access  the content when not looking at the board). they were also  asked to number content in the order they would erase it, if  they had to erase the board piecemeal.  analysis  after transcribing interviews and diary entries, we selected  salient quotes, and used an open coding approach [21] to  categorize them, creating a holistic representation of user  data. we derived the coding scheme from group discussion.  emerging categories were discussed, and a shared under- standing was developed iteratively by the authors. we  classified comments as frequency of use, reasons for use,  erasing, temporal vs. momentary value, workarounds, and  desired features.   phase i vignettes  we use three representative vignettes to ground discussion  of our observations of current practice. each vignette  corresponds to a single participant’s account of her own  whiteboard use. vignettes were chosen to demonstrate a  wide range of board-related attitudes and behaviors; quotes  from participants highlight particularly revealing aspects of  use. these vignettes are intended to illustrate broader  trends that were recorded in interviews and through the  chumby, (table 1). we build on these personas in  discussing phase ii to highlight the effects of the  deployment.  chi 2010: making meaning in large displays april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 77


  daphne  daphne is a research scientist and she absolutely “love[s]”  her whiteboard. she uses it to organize her thoughts, to  design, to make to-do lists, to collaborate with others, and  to serve as a constant reminder. she sometimes hangs  objects on her board. her board use ranges from daily to  once in a few weeks, with heavier use during design stages.   daphne erases things only when she knows “for sure, for  sure, for sure that [she] doesn’t need it” anymore, and she  writes small to fit as much as she can on the board. she  describes her whiteboard as “persistent.” erasing is her  least favorite thing about her whiteboard; she’s “afraid of  erasing things—it’s not big enough to keep everything.”   items on daphne’s board have different levels  of value, ranging from “things that can [be  erased] any time because [she] explained  something to another person, so [she doesn’t]  need that” to content that has been up for  months if not longer. these include her to-do  list, a diagram that she was discussing with  colleagues that they didn’t quite complete, and  several pictures she keeps taped to her board because  “they’re conversation starters.” even though daphne  wanted to use her board for data analysis, she did not want  to erase an existing diagram.   daphne has taken pictures of boards after collaboration and  she has also written “do not erase” on public boards, but  she has not done either of these recently. she does not  recall ever referring back to saved pictures of whiteboards  intentionally, but remembered accidentally stumbling upon  one on her computer. daphne wishes “there would be a  more persistent thing” so that she can “capture things from  it easily—then [she] would use it more.” she says that she  would like to be able to see her whiteboard to-do list when  at home. daphne recalled referring to her board once in a  discussion with coworkers outside her office, when she  described a diagram on her board that she had memorized.  eunice  eunice is a software engineer who is “not very attached” to  her board and “wouldn’t miss it if it was gone.” she does,  however, use it to structure thoughts, to draw charts and  graphs, to maintain a to-do list, to brainstorm with  colleagues, and to manage reminders. most of her board  activity is collaborative as opposed to individual, because it  helps to “communicate something i have in my mind that  cannot just be done verbally.” she does not hang content on  the board because she “[doesn’t] use paper” in her office.  whiteboard use fluctuates greatly based on the phase of a  project she is in: “design phases, requirement phases—it’s  all whiteboard; a month from the demo—nothing.”  eunice erases her board only as space is needed “because  it’s going to be painful to rewrite them again.” often, she  will start a collaborative writing session on an empty part  of the board and then have to erase something of value  because space has run out. one problem she finds is that  she “write[s] things of temporal value, but then there’s no  way to keep them or reclaim the space.”  eunice sometimes copies content into a text editor to save it  permanently. during the week of observation, for instance,  she copied some items from her to-do list into a text editor  on her computer to free up space on her board. sometimes  after collaboration in a public meeting room, she has taken  pictures of a board with her cell phone “just in case it gets  erased.” but these pictures were not consulted after the  fact; they served primarily as a “security net.” she does,  however, think that it is helpful to go back to drawings  made on conference room boards because the board helps  the group pick up where it left off. during the observation  period, eunice referred back to her whiteboard three times,  including once to copy to-do list items from the board into  a digital text editor.  francesca  francesca is a software engineer who “[does not] have  much of a relationship with [her] whiteboard.” she finds  that the board “hasn’t been particularly useful” since she  got it in her office two months ago. she does not like to  hang things on her board because she is “a bit of a neat  freak.” in fact, her whiteboard use is so rare that she “[does  not] even see it as part of [her work flow].”  when she does use the board, it is “purely for  collaboration...to illustrate something for someone.” most  of the drawings on her broad are made by other people:  “some people draw things on my whiteboard and i don’t  existing whiteboard behavior people frequency of board use  varies widely, depends on project 6  is rare, less than once a week  3  reasons/purpose for board use  individually, to work things out 9  collaboratively, to communicate momentarily 7  individually, to remember something 6  collaboratively, to remember something 5  personal effects 3  erasing habits  bit-by-bit, as space is needed 5  whole board, when it fills 4  workarounds for board inadequacies  take a picture of board 8  manually copy board content to paper or pc 5  choose not to use the board 4  erase valuable content  2  table 1. board use in phase i of the study (pre- reboard) based on nine participants.  chi 2010: making meaning in large displays april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 78


  want to wipe them off in case they go by and see that i’ve  removed what they've drawn.” however, “sometimes, at  least once in the past two months, [she has] been just  frustrated that the board looks like a mess and [has] just  cleaned everything off.”   in terms of value of board content, francesca notes that  “there’s some useful stuff… but it’s really stuff that [she]  could just get by googling.” for the majority of the  content, “its moment has passed” and is no longer valuable  information. she “see[s] things that are on the whiteboard  as obsolete as soon as the conversation is over.” on the  other hand, francesca says that she has actually drawn one  particular sketch several times because it had been erased  by collaborators who needed drawing room.  phase i results and discussion  these vignettes illustrate five interesting phenomena  observed broadly among participants: tension between  erasing and writing new content, dynamic lifespan of board  content, ways in which content moves from the board into  other work, range of value of board content, and the role of  serendipity in referring back to useful content. we discuss  these further below, tying in observations of other  participants and data gathered outside of interviews.  tension between erasing and writing new content  five people (typified by eunice and daphne), tended not to  erase the board until space was needed (i.e., they were  “space scavengers” [16]). four others, including francesca,  reported clearing the entire board when it gets too messy or  outdated, exhibiting “clean desk user” behavior [16].   people place different value on different items on the  board. some said that they erase personal drawings first  because drawings created by others are “something that  [they] can’t reproduce.” others said the opposite: “these are  my personal ideas for research, i think it is important.”  some items, like the conversational aids noted by daphne,  could be erased at any time because they had been  internalized, while others could be erased because people  no longer remembered what they were. some useful items  might be erased because they are stored elsewhere: “this  one has been there for a long time and probably…we have  already put this in our code” and “when something concrete  is finished, i usually erase the sketch from the board.”  importance of items on the board is not the only  determining factor: four participants noted that erasing is  also affected by the “convenience” of the drawing space.  two of them said that the space closest to their office doors  was often used by others and thus exhibited more flux.  drawings on the board vary in their importance. on one  end of the spectrum, daphne was hesitant to erase content  because she was “afraid that [she would] lose some of [her]  thoughts.” one diagram “has been up since after chi, and i  didn’t want to erase it.” another participant identified a  drawing she was saving because she “really [didn’t] want  to lose the discussion” with her co-workers. others were  not as concerned. as one participant explained, “finite  space is...probably the biggest problem…i get rid of things  before i had intended to...there's things that i may want to  look back at, but if i had to make the decision of whether i  want to get the new space or...delete it, usually the sort of  creative urge wins.” five participants fell between these  extremes: “if it’s actually useful, it will probably end up in  a piece of code” and “if it’s gone it’s gone, and i probably  don’t have to think about it anymore.”  lifespan of board content  it is no surprise that whiteboards are dynamic, that the  content is both fleeting and persistent, but the extent of  variation is quite dramatic—content lifespan can range  from seconds to years. during our observation period, we  saw 101 preexisting or created items on participants’  boards, 49 of which remained on the board at the end.  across all users, 10 items created during this period were  erased within a week, two of which were erased within two  days. seven participants identified 41 items to be several  months old. some reported erasing content within seconds  or minutes of it being created. although not documented by  reboard1, two such short-lived items were observed during  interviews with two different participants; they were drawn  as conversational aids and erased immediately after. due to  a short observation period, and because intensity of board  use varies greatly with project cycles (as reported by six  participants and ju et al. [10]), we report values only to  show the wide range of content persistence.   getting things off the board  all three personas identified ways in which content moved  from their boards into other work: copying content into  other media, taking pictures of the board, looking back at  the board itself, or simply internalizing the content.  through the diary data, we documented 21 references to  content on the board. while users thought the diary study  was accurate in capturing these events, it is likely that some  were not recorded; we consider these measures to be a  lower bound of the actual number of events, rather than as  representative averages.  eight participants reported having taken pictures of   whiteboards in the past, but only one reported ever  referring back to such pictures. most are like eunice and  daphne in that they take pictures as a safety net and do not  refer back to them. five people reported copying board  content into other media (such as sticky notes, emails,  documents, visio diagrams, code, etc.) and then using those  as primary references. one person said “i sketch [the board  drawing] again on paper to save it, or i take a picture of it  to save it, but that’s all pretty rare. there’s usually nothing  up here that hasn’t turned into something else…” another  identified a diagram she had drawn collaboratively and  noted: “and then that got written down into a paper... i’m  going to refer to the paper.”                                                    1 automatic capture happens only during periods of  inactivity for privacy and image quality reasons, making it  harder to capture transient board content.   chi 2010: making meaning in large displays april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 79


  value of board content  whiteboard content can have value beyond short-term  representation. to gauge this, we asked participants to  classify board content value for all items on their boards.  classification took place along two lines: temporal and  spatial value. we define temporal value as value beyond  the 8-hour work day in which the content was created (so, a  board item has temporal value if it would be useful the  morning after it was created, as a reference). spatial value  is value beyond the surface on which the content was  created (so, a board item has spatial value if it would be  useful in a different room as the whiteboard it is authored  on, perhaps on different media, like paper). participants  identified their content to have one, both, or neither of these  traits. of the 101 drawings categorized, 24% were  identified to have both spatial and temporal value, 30% had  only temporal, 5% had only spatial, and 41% had neither.  although we cannot conclude that all items were actually  valuable, the numbers suggest that content does have value  beyond the time and place of creation. taken together with  the observations of varying lifespan of content, the tension  between erasing and authoring new content, and the  movement of board content into other media, the explicit  assessment of board value by participants provides  compelling reason to believe that a great deal of board  content—perhaps as much as 60%—is valuable and would  be retrained if space on the board was not constrained.   serendipitous content encounters  in most cases, the whiteboard is an explicit source of  information, but board content sometimes presents value in  unexpected ways—at different times, under different  circumstances, and with different outcomes than antici- pated. these interactions may result from unplanned  encounters with information in the environment or from  pre-meditated placement of items in the environment [1].  we found evidence of both in our qualitative interviews.  sometimes board content becomes unintentionally useful at  a later time. for example, one user explained that his  whiteboard is not terribly organized, but “that's ok because  sometimes it also reveals that two uis i'm working on are  about the same; yeah, and maybe i should do something  different.” eunice said that drawings from earlier meetings  in the same conference room may still be on the board and  can be spontaneously re-incorporated into their discussion.  content sometimes also serves as an implicit reminder to  participants of earlier ideas and of ongoing collaborations.  for example, one person “didn’t look at anything specific”  on her board, but it gave her “a sense of where [she] was”  that day. another participant uses the board similarly: “you  know if i come in and i'm like ‘what am i going to do  today’—i have no ideas—i just have to turn around and go  ‘oh, ok, that was one of the things that i did.’”  several participants placed content on their boards more  deliberately so that either they or their co-workers would  “stumble” upon them later. three participants kept items on  their boards because they are “good to start some  conversation.” daphne hung printouts of  images from the board’s pen tray because  “they…capture people's imagination…they  are conversation starters." another person  called items on her board “pictures on the  wall.” she was going to erase the board  once reboard was installed, but the  picture of the guitar is still there: “well,  my daughter drew that.” five others  indicated that they kept content (to-do lists,  diagrams, notes) to jog their memories  about things they have done or need to do. one participant  keeps a list of “difficult problems that are still important,  but [she doesn’t] know how to solve them… open  questions that [she’s] not going to get to” so that she can  use them for inspiration.  study, phase ii  the second phase of the study ran for 5.5 weeks and  involved the launch and observation of reboard system  use. each participant had access to the reboard web ui  through personal accounts and chumbys. reboard cameras  were also installed in conference rooms and accounts were  created for these rooms. participants were given an hour- long live demo of the interface and a quiz of core system  functionality on the first day of deployment to familiarize  them with its features. in addition, a formative analysis of  reboard usability was carried out during the second week  of deployment, and changes were rolled out in the  beginning of the third week.  data collection   we continued to collect board captures from the reboard  system, and participants were asked to make chumby diary  entries whenever they referred to content on their physical  boards or through the reboard interface. in addition, server  logs of interaction with the chumby and web interfaces  were collected. two semi-structured interviews were  conducted. the first interview was a half-hour discussion  about reboard activity and likes/dislikes of the system as  part of a formative analysis of the system. these interviews  were grounded in server logs, board printouts, a  walkthrough of the ui, and diary transcripts. the second  interview was an hour-long discussion about reboard use  and the impact of the system on whiteboard practices.  analysis was the same as in phase i, with an open coding  scheme followed by more focused categorization.  phase ii vignettes  building from the vignettes presented in the phase i  section, we follow daphne, eunice, and francesca in their  post-reboard whiteboard activities. as in phase i, these  vignettes represent a sampling of the range of behavior we  elicited in interviews and through the chumby diaries; the  full results are shown in table 2.  daphne   now that she has reboard, daphne feels free to use her  whiteboard more often, and “erase[s] more and more often  …because [she doesn’t] need to be afraid that [she’s]  chi 2010: making meaning in large displays april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 80


  erasing something that is useful.” reboard serves as a  backup of board contents before she erases: “if [she needs]  to go back to something and see what [she] erased, [she]  can do it.” daphne’s increased board activity is reflected in  the pictures of her board, which show “dramatic” changes  in content and sometimes large white spaces that she  doesn’t “remember having...for a long time.” now she can  “more freely use the whiteboard for what [she’s] currently  focusing on.” in the period of six weeks, daphne has  created two large diagrams on her board that involved  numerous paper printouts; she hadn’t “done that before–– [she] feel[s] more comfortable erasing things and then [she]  can use it for displaying other things."   throughout the six week period, daphne used reboard to  share images, to look at her board while working from  home, and to view erased content that she could not recall.  most of the pictures daphne shared were drawings created  during group meetings in a conference room. daphne wants  “to make sure that...things are preserved and everybody has  access to what you were discussing.” in one case, daphne  shared a picture of her personal office whiteboard with  colleagues. once daphne “felt confident that reboard  captured it and [she] made a note on that [picture] and  shared it with the people that were involved..., [she] felt  that [she] could erase everything." she also used reboard  to retrieve items that had been erased and redrew them in a  larger, modified rendition of the original diagram.  daphne finds that reboard has made her “feel more free  with [her] whiteboard,” and thus alleviated the “anxiety”  associated with erasing her board; “[she] know[s] that it  captures things and that even if [she doesn’t] go in there  and make a conscious effort…it will be there and [she] can  find things.” daphne would like to keep reboard in her  office (“don’t take it away!”) and thinks it will continue to  be useful in the conference rooms.  eunice  eunice’s habits have changed with respect to the type and  form of the content created. she has begun using the board  for “putting together more coherent thoughts; now [she is]  actually using it to write meaningful content that stands on  its own, perhaps because it’s archived.” in addition, she is  now “writing neater” and adds “more details” when she  anticipates sharing her whiteboard via reboard with  coworkers. she says that “earlier i wouldn't be putting [the  details] in there knowing that i would be adding those  details digitally” when re-creating the diagram in another  application. the ability to share has made eunice use her  board more often for collaborative diagrams; before, she  used it “only when words were failing.”  eunice used reboard to take pictures for archival purposes,  to email collaborators in preparation for meetings, to gener- ate discussion materials, and to recreate drawings on the  whiteboard. while in francesca’s office, she snapped a  picture of the board they had coauthored so that francesca  could be “free to erase it;” later, she asked francesca to  print it to use in a meeting with another colleague. in yet  another situation, she used reboard to display “a drawing  that [she] had put up on francesca’s board...so that [they]  could build on it rather than start from scratch." eunice  printed the image out and then the two drew on that sheet in  a continued collaborative discussion.  eunice uses the chumby almost exclusively because it  provides a “very simple ui.” she has used the web ui  from home and for printing copies of the board; “any other  time, the chumby is a lot more useful.” she uses it to take  pictures and send them to herself through email because  “email archives it.”   while she finds the presence of a camera in her personal  office space to be a downside to the reboard system and  desires the ability to reproduce erased drawings back to the  whiteboard, eunice “definitely” wants to keep reboard in  her office after the study. she sees it as a “required thing”  for any whiteboard—especially conference room boards— and it would be “sorely missed” if taken away.  francesca  francesca did not use the whiteboard during phase i, but  used it 26 times during phase ii, and she converted from a  “space scavenger” to a “clean desk user” [17]. the system  “allows [her] to erase her board more often” and as a result,  post-reboard behavior events people frequency of board use  used reboard >=3 times  7  used reboard < 3 times   3  reasons/purpose for board use (new workflows)  referred to erased content via rb image 7 5  shared rb image with colleague 8 4  viewed own board remotely 4 3  looked at image shared via rb 4 3  printed rb image for discussion 3 3  printed rb image to carry to meeting and  referred to it while copying to whiteboard 2 2  looked at or printed rb image to make  sure it was captured 2 2  used rb to share jokes 4 3  emailed/shared rb image with colleagues  to prepare for meeting 3 1  looked at rb image of current, co-present  whiteboard on pc monitor 2 1  reboard concerns  chumby is on desk, not on whiteboard  3  privacy concerns  4  table 2. board use from phase ii of study (with  reboard) based on ten participants.  chi 2010: making meaning in large displays april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 81


  she finds that collaborators “seem more willing to write on  the board when it’s empty.” in some instances, however,  she is still “hesitant to erase [her board] because [she is not]  convinced that the image quality would actually be good  enough.” she finds herself writing larger and clearer on her  board given the limitations of the camera.  francesca uses reboard to access drawings when working  from home, to act as a “paging mechanism” when space  runs out on the board, and to bring pictures to meetings. in  one collaborative session in her office, she used reboard to  snap two pictures before erasing the board “to make sure  [she] didn't lose anything... [she] needed to record the to-do  aspect of it.” she printed out the drawings, redrew the final  diagram in a visio document, and also used it in a  subsequent discussion with a different coworker.   francesca thinks “the chumby, as a physical item, is just  completely disconnected from the board” and that “the  natural instinct is to press something on the board.”  francesca primarily uses the web ui to take snapshots, and  to find, print and share images. although francesca found  reboard useful on several occasions and continued to use  reboard after the study ended, she says she would prefer  not to keep the system in her office because the cameras  raise privacy concerns for her, and she finds the wiring  messy. she would like to see higher quality images, as  sometimes details are lacking in the current system.  phase ii results and discussion  new workflows  tang et al. [22] suggest that the whiteboard supports  transitions between related sets of tasks within the physical  boundaries of the board. reboard enables transitions beyond  the physical boundaries of the board by making whiteboard  content available for a range of tools and work practices. we  gave examples of these workflows in the accounts of our  personas; in table 2 we provide a more complete list of  workflows we observed that were made possible by the  reboard system.  table 3 complements the observational  data with log-based results. the data shows automatic  capture rates for phase i, the same rates scaled to the phase ii  deployment length, phase ii auto and manual capture rates,  the number of sessions of ui use (phase ii only), and sharing  and print rates for phase ii.   d e f g h i j k l m  phase i  auto 1 7 0 0 10 21 3 30 21 16  phase i  adjusted 3 21 0 0 30 63 9 90 63 48  phase ii  auto 72 33 64 81 10 73 15 118 77 28  phase ii  manual 1 9 18 9 1 12 3 2 2 20  reboard  sessions 9 15 26 6 6 3 13 3 8 7  sharing 5 5 4 1   2  3   printing  2 2    1     table 3. frequency of use of whiteboard and reboard.  each column represents one participant.  six participants shared data through e-mail or within- reboard, and three printed images for sharing with others.   we also saw different attitudes toward controlling the  system: five users (shown in bold) captured many images  manually, while the rest relied more on automatic captures.  even in manual cases, however, the system still caught  many changes the person failed to record explicitly. phase i  adjusted board use did not predict reboard use (r=0.42 for  auto, r=0.12 for manual, r=0.39 for sum). we note that  extreme light level fluctuation in the office of participant k  confused the change detection algorithms, resulting in a  higher rate of observed changes. overall, however, this  variability supports the range of individual differences in  board use we found in interviews.  we also observed more frivolous uses: people used  reboard to exchange humorous sketches, to create amu- sing drawings, and to leave funny messages for researchers.  freeform interaction with the whiteboard coupled with an  easy sharing mechanism translated into opportunities for  people to inject affect and humor into their work.    figure 4. ufo blasting away a data structure.  tension between ephemerality and persistence  we found that, whiteboards encourage people to make  “noncommittal” sketches as they “follow the flow of [their]  thoughts” at the board. the erasability of the board “helps  to frame the psychology of the design activity” [10] and  leads to pre-production material [16]. reboard, however,  converts ephemeral board content into persistent media.  with persistence comes the ability to reuse content; content  may become more purposeful and of greater longevity, as it  can easily be transferred into more “production-ready”  media (email, printouts, presentations, etc.) potentially  intented for a wider audience. reboard can thus be seen as  creating tension between the ephemerality and persistence  of board content. we saw that both eunice and francesca  now pay attention to the production quality of their board  content in anticipation of future use. while most users  report that they still write on the board in much the same  way as before—with rough doodles and scribbles still  prevalent on their boards—it is important to consider how  characteristics of whiteboard augmenting technology may  alter the psychology and activities of users at the board.  perceptions of privacy  cameras in people’s offices are a well-documented source  of concerns about privacy. one person declined to  chi 2010: making meaning in large displays april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 82


  participate in the study due to our use of cameras for  capturing board content, and four participants commented  on the use of cameras. one used a lens cap on his camera as  a privacy measure because he did not trust the system “off  state;” another wanted to add physical distortion to blur the  collaboration detection camera; a third wanted to make sure  camera access was password-protected.   while our research goals were not directly related to  exploring privacy, we tried to mitigate these concerns in the  design of the system. reboard grants access to camera  output only to the owner of a camera, unless the image is  shared explicitly. raw camera feeds are only accessible to  the reboard server. this level of security is comparable to  that offered by other corporate infrastructure such as the e- mail server. the collaboration detection camera can operate  in a de-focused state, mitigating concerns for at least one of  our participants. finally, our use of a camera to capture  whiteboard images was a decision of convenience; a better  approach would be to use networked still cameras, which  would not only mitigate some privacy issues, but also  produce higher-quality images.  out of sight, out of mind  content on the whiteboard is valuable because it is always  available for active and passive use. the board has a  physical, visual presence in the users’ offices that software  cannot match. while the chumby does provide a dedicated  representation of the system, its small display limits its  utility as a detailed content reference. francesca was  concerned about the separation of the web ui from the  physical board and the activities that take place at it—a  sentiment echoed by two other participants. one user  identified the benefit of not having to “boot up [her]  computer, visit a website, log into anything” to use the  whiteboard. in addition, finding content on her physical  board does not require her to search; “it’s always right  there;” with reboard, it would be “out of sight out of  mind.” another participant reports: “i have all kinds of  problems staying out of my browser as it is... i’m not trying  to go there.” finally, because reboard encourages higher  turnover of board content, it may require explicit seeking to  find erased content, perhaps reducing the chances of  serendipitous discovery.  lessons learned  grease the wheels  in addition to handling multiple workflows, it is important  to support transitions between them since sketches with  similar physical traits can have widely different uses at  different times. for example, a sketch drawn only to help  understand a concept may transition to a personal reminder  to write a summary of the concept, and later may play a  role in a brainstorming session with others interested in  related ideas [22]. furthermore, the importance a person  places on a sketch can change without any physical change  to the sketch itself. while use can correlate with physical  traits (e.g., to-do lists are likely to appear on the side of a  board) the relationships are weak and exceptions are  common. thus, it is important to design systems that allow  sketches to move seamlessly between tasks, persistent and  ephemeral use, and analog and digital re-representations.  reboard’s flexibility created a range of new workflows  around whiteboard content (table 2).  in our deployment of reboard, we found in many cases  that users were able to make these transitions simply—  images were printed, and printed and analog sketches were  pasted on the whiteboard and converted back into digital  form. reboard relies on the inherent flexibility in the board  itself to allow users to decide whether content is persistent  or ephemeral rather than designing features that might  make this decision too rigid.  we can also augment reboard to make it easier for content  to move between different types of tasks. for example,  tools that automatically improve the aesthetics of  whiteboard pictures can make it easier to share printed  content (after the field deployment we developed such a  tool, which is derived from earlier work with scanned  documents [25]). other features might make it easier for  people to move images directly from their reboard stream  onto digital annotation tools.  to each his own  whiteboard system design must recognize that people will  develop widely different ways of using the tools. while we  focused our efforts on a fully featured web interface, our  formative work suggested the importance of light-weight  interactions for key functions such as snapping and sending  a photo and turning the system on and off. we designed the  chumby interface to fill this role. some participants used  the system in exactly that way—the chumby for quick  interactions, and the web ui for browsing and  collaboration. some people used only the chumby because  they found the web ui too cumbersome, while others used  only the web ui because they wanted a more complete  interface. thus, although the use of the system did not  exactly match our predictions, the formative work paid off.  given that people tend to appropriate tools to meet their  needs, it benefits designers to release a broad set of tools  initially to encourage adoption. we could push on this  approach in future deployments of reboard, introducing an  even more lightweight interface than the chumby that users  could mount next to their board to recreate the physicality  of reminders. similarly, a hybrid deployment of reboard  and another electronic whiteboard system might address  problems some participants reported. for example, relying  on an ebeam system rather than a camera to capture stroke  data could mitigate concerns eunice and francesca had  about image quality and having cameras in their office.  conclusions   we explored how and when whiteboard content is reused in  a real workplace context. we built the reboard system to  retrieve captured images based on whatever metadata the  user can recall, and to reuse those images through sharing,  printing, and transferring them to other applications. using  chi 2010: making meaning in large displays april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 83


  this system as a foil, we have identified and explored the  notion of the whiteboard as an information repository with  permeable boundaries through which information can  readily flow into new work practices.   through our initial deployment, we have identified key  issues related to whiteboard work practice that must be  addressed in the design of augmentation systems: the  tension between transience and persistence, between the  visible and the hidden; serendipitous interaction with  content; and sentimental items on the board. as we change  the whiteboard by digitally mimicking or augmenting it, we  change users’ perceptions, interactions, expectations, and  workflows associated with this ubiquitous technology.   ongoing exploration of how people use whiteboards in  different phases of their work, coupled with long-term  exposure to reboard interfaces should yield additional  insights into how work practices are augmented by making  content available for sharing and reuse.  acknowledgments  we thank elizabeth churchill, steve harrison, scott  mccrickard, and laurian vega for their comments on an  earlier draft, and our participants for their insights and  willingness to tolerate our software development “process.”  references  1. bernstein, m., van kleek, m., karger, d. and schraefel,  m.c. 2008. information scraps: how and why information  eludes our personal information management tools. acm  trans. inf. syst. 26, 4, 1-46.  2. brotherton, j.a. and abowd, g.d. 2004. lessons learned  from eclass: assessing automated capture and access in  the classroom. acm trans. comput.-hum. interact. 11,  2, 121-155.  3. cherubini, m., venolia, g., deline, r., and ko, a. 2007.  let's go to the whiteboard: how and why software  developers use drawings. in proc. chi2007, acm,  new york, ny, 557-566.  4. chumby. www.chumby.org  5. ebeam. www.e-beam.com  6. elrod, s., bruce, r., gold, r., goldberg, d., halasz, f.,  janssen, w., lee, d., mccall, k., pedersen, e., pier, k.,  tang, j., and welch, b. 1992. "liveboard: a large  interactive display supporting group meetings,  presentations, and remote collaboration," in proc.  chi92, acm, new york, ny, 599-607.  7. golovchinsky, g., carter, s., and biehl, j. 2009. beyond  the drawing board: toward more effective use of  whiteboard content. arxiv:0911.0039v2.  8. huang, e.m., mynatt, e.d., russell, d.m., sue, a.e.  2006. secrets to success and fatal flaws: the design of  large-display groupware. ieee computer graphics  and applications, 26, 1, 37-45.  9. ishii, h. 1990. teamworkstation: towards a seamless  shared workspace. in proc. cscw '90. acm, new  york, ny, 13-26.  10. ju, w., ionescu, a., neeley, l., and winograd, t. 2004.  where the wild things work: capturing shared physical  design workspaces. in proc. cscw '04. acm, new  york, ny, 533-541.  11. kidd, a. 1994. the marks are on the knowledge worker.  in proc. chi '94, acm, new york, ny, 186-191.  12. mimio. www.mimio.com  13. minneman, s. and bly, s.  1991. managing a trois: a  study of a multi-user drawing tool in distributed design  work. in proc. chi '91. acm, new york, ny, 217-224.  14. moran, t.p., chiu, p., harrison, s., kurtenbach, g.,  minneman, s., and van melle, w. 1996. evolutionary  engagement in an ongoing collaborative work process: a  case study. in proc. cscw '96. acm, new york, ny,  150-159.  15. moran, t. p., palen, l., harrison, s., chiu, p., kimber,  d., minneman, s., van melle, w., and zellweger, p.  1997. “i'll get that off the audio”: a case study of  salvaging multimedia meeting records. in proc. chi97.  acm, new york, ny, 202-209.   16. mynatt, e.d. "the writing on the wall" 1999. proc.  interact ’99, ios press, edinburgh, uk 196-204.  17. mynatt, e.d., igarashi, t., edwards, w.k., and lamarca,  a. 1999. flatland: new dimensions in office white- boards, proc. chi99, acm, new york, ny, 346 - 353.  18. perry, m., and o’hara, k. 2003. display-based activity  in the workplace. in proc interact’03, ios press,  591-598.  19. saund, e. "bringing the marks on a whiteboard to  electronic life," 1999. proc. 2nd intl. workshop on  cooperative buildings, 69-78.  20. smartboard. www.smarttech.com  21. strauss, a. and corbin, j. basics of qualitative research:  grounded theory procedures and techniques. sage  publications, inc., newbury park, ca, 1990.  22. tang, a., lanir, j., greenberg, s., and fels, s. 2009.  supporting transitions in work: informing large  display application design by understanding  whiteboard use, in proc. acm group 2009, acm,  new york, ny.  23. tang, j.c. and minneman, s. 1991. videowhiteboard:  video shadows to support remote collaboration. in proc.  chi '91. acm, new york, ny, 315-322.  24. voida, s., mynatt, e.d., macintyre, b., corso, g. 2002.  integrating virtual and physical context to support  knowledge workers. ieee pervasive comp, 1, 3, 73-79.  25. wellner, p.d. 1993. adaptive thresholding for the  digitaldesk. technical report epc-1993-110.   26. xiao, y., c. lasome, j. moss, c.f. mackenzie, and s.  faraj, cognitive properties of a whiteboard: a case  study in a trauma centre. in proc. ecscw 2001, 259- 278.    chi 2010: making meaning in large displays april 10–15, 2010, atlanta, ga, usa 84
