 Antiemetic efficacy of the neurokinin-1 antagonist , aprepitant , plus a 5HT3 antagonist and a corticosteroid in patients receiving anthracyclines or cyclophosphamide in addition to high-dose cisplatin : analysis of combined data from two Phase III randomized clinical trials .
 The tendency of chemotherapeutic regimens to cause vomiting is dependent on the individual drugs in the regimen .
 The authors analyzed data combined from 2 Phase III trials to assess the effect of the neurokinin-1 ( NK(1 ) ) antagonist aprepitant combined with a 5HT(3 ) antagonist plus a corticosteroid in a subpopulation receiving > 1 emetogenic chemotherapeutic agent .
 In the current study , 1043 cisplatin-naive patients ( 42 % were women ) receiving cisplatin-based ( > or = 70 mg/m(2 ) ) chemotherapy were assigned randomly to a control regimen ( ondansetron [ O ] 32 mg intravenously and dexamethasone [ D ] 20 mg orally on Day 1 ; D 8 mg twice daily on Days 2-4 ) or an aprepitant ( A ) regimen ( A 125 mg orally plus O 32 mg and D 12 mg on Day 1 ; A 80 mg and D 8 mg once daily on Days 2-3 ; and D 8 mg on Day 4 ) .
 Randomization was stratified for use of concomitant chemotherapy and female gender .
 The primary end point was complete response ( no vomiting and no rescue therapy ) on Days 1-5 ( 0-120 hours ) .
 Data were analyzed by a modified intent-to-treat approach , and logistic regression was used to make treatment comparisons among patients receiving the most frequently coadministered emetogenic concomitant chemotherapy ( Hesketh level > or = 3 ) .
 Among the approximately 13 % of patients ( n = 81 for A ; n = 80 for control ) who received additional emetogenic chemotherapy ( doxorubicin or cyclophosphamide ) , the aprepitant regimen provided a 33 percentage-point improvement in the complete response rate compared with the control regimen .
 Among the general population , the advantage with aprepitant was 20 percentage points .
 The current analysis of > 1000 patients from 2 large randomized trials showed that in the subpopulation at increased risk of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting due to concomitant emetogenic chemotherapy , the addition of aprepitant to standard antiemetics improved protection to an even greater extent than in the general study population .
